
ON FOR BLADE RUNNER


DROIDS


A KIND OF


PULP-FICTION


Kafka


A PROPHET


I —Eric P. Nash
Tnt: New York Times


PHILIP K. DICK


Introduction by Roger Zelazny















Digitized by the Internet Archive

in 2017



https://archive.org/details/androidsdreamOOdick


So that’s how the largest manufacturer of androids
operates, Rick said to himself. Devious, and in a
manner he had never encountered before. A weird
and convoluted new personality type; no wonder law
enforcement agencies were having trouble with the
Nexus-6.

The Nexus-6. He had now come up against it.
Rachael, he realized; she must be a Nexus-6, I’m
seeing one of them for the first time. And they damn
near did it; they came awfully close to undermining
the Voight-Kampff scale, the only method we have
for detecting them. The Rosen Association does a
good job—makes a good try, anyhow—at protecting
its products.

And I have to face six more of them, he reflected.
Before I’m finished.

He would earn the bounty money. Every cent.

Assuming he made it through alive . . .

“If the ’70s and ’80s . . . belonged to William
Burroughs, the millennium belongs to Philip K. Dick.”

—Erik Davis
Details


BOOKS BY PHILIP K. DICK
AVAILABLE FROM VINTAGE BOOKS

Confessions of a Crap Artist

The Divine Invasion

Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said

Galactic Pot-Healer

The Game-Players of Titan

The Man in the High Castle

Martian Time-Slip

A Maze of Death

Now Wait for Last Year

A Scanner Darkly

The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch
The Transmigration of Timothy Archer
Ubik
VALIS

We Can Build You
The World Jones Made


D

O




A

N

D

R

O 1 D S

D

R

E

A

M

O

E




E

L

E

C

T R 1 C

S

H

E

E

P ?


PHILIP K. DICK


l»51


REY


A DEL REY® BOOK

BALLANTINE BOOKS


NEW YORK



PUBLISHER’S NOTE: In 1968, Philip K. Dick wrote Do Androids
Dream of Electric Sheep?, a brilliant sf novel that became the source
of the motion picture Blade Runner. Though the novel’s characters
and backgrounds differ in some respects from those of the film, read¬
ers who enjoy the latter will discover an added dimension of encoun¬
tering the original work. Del Rey® Books is pleased to return this
classic novel to print.


A Del Rey® Book

Published by The Random House Publishing Group

Copyright © 1968 by Philip K. Dick

Introduction copyright © 1975 by Roger Zelazny

First published in Philip K Dick: Electric Shepherd by Norstrilia Press

All rights reserved.

Published in the United States by Del Rey Books, an imprint of The
Random House Publishing Group, a division of Random House, Inc.,
New York, and simultaneously in Canada by Random House of Canada
Limited, Toronto. Originally published by Doubleday and Company,
Inc. in 1968.

Del Rey is a registered trademark and the Del Rey colophon is a
trademark of Random House, Inc.

www.delreybooks.com

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 96-96117

ISBN 0-345-40447-5

Cover design by David Stevenson
Cover illustration by Bruce Jensen

Manufactured in the United States of America

First Ballantine Books Trade Paperback Edition: June 1996


19 18 17



TO TIM AND SERENA POWERS,
MY DEAREST FRIENDS



PHILIP K. DICK


AN INTRODUCTION BY

ROGER ZELAZNY

(1) Once there was a man who repaired trash compactors because
that was what he loved doing more than anything else in the world—

(2) Once there was a man who repaired trash compactors in a soci¬
ety short on building materials, where properly compacted trash
could be used as an architectural base—

(3) Once there was a man who hated trash compactors but re¬
paired them for a living and to keep his manic wife in tranquilisers
so that he did not have to spend so much time with his mistress, who
was less fun now that she had converted to the new religion—

(4) Once there was a man who, in purposely misassembling the
trash compactors he hated, produced a machine which—

It is no good. 1 can’t do it. I can play the Thirteen Ways of Looking
at a Trash Compactor Repairman Game, but I cannot turn it into a
story at once puzzling, poignant, grotesque, philosophical, satirical,
and fun. There is a very special way of doing this and the first step in
its mastery involves being Philip K. Dick.

Brian Aldiss has called him “one of the masters of present-day dis¬
contents,” a thing readily apparent in much of his work. But one of the
great fascinations his work holds for me is the effects achieved when
he dumps these discontents into that special machine in his head and
turns on the current. It is not simply that I consider it a form of aes¬
thetic cheating to compare one writer with another, but I cannot think
of another writer with whom to compare Philip Dick. Aldiss suggests
Pirandello, which is not bad for the one small aspect of reality shuf¬
fling. But Pirandello’s was basically a destructive machine. It was a
triumph of technique over convention, possessed of but one basic
message no matter what was fed into the chopper. Phihp Dick’s is a


vii









viii


INTRODUCTION


far more complicated program. His management of a story takes you;
from here to there in a God-knows-how, seemingly haphazard fash- j
ion, which, upon reflection, follows a logical line of development—but
only on reflection. While you are trapped within the spell of its telling,
you are in no better position than one of its invariably overwhelmed
characters when it comes to seeing what wQl happen next.

These characters are often victims, prisoners, manipulated men
and women. It is generally doubtful whether they will leave the
world with less evil in it than they found there. But you never know.
They try. They are usually at bat in the last half of the ninth inning
with the tying run on base, two men out, two strikes and three balls
riding, with the possibility of the game being called on account of
rain at any second. But then, what is rain? Or a ballpark?

The worlds through which Philip Dick’s characters move are sub¬
ject to cancellation or revision without notice. Reality is approxi¬
mately as dependable as a politician’s promise. Whether it is a drug,
a time-warp, a machine, or an alien entity responsible for the bewil¬
dering shifting of situations about his people, the result is the same:
Reality, of the capital “R” variety, has become as relative a thing as
the dryness of our respective Martinis. Yet the struggle goes on, the
fight continues. Against what? Ultimately, Powers, Principalities,
Thrones, and Dominations, often contained in hosts who are them-1
selves victims, prisoners, manipulated men and women. i

All of which sounds like grimly serious fare. Wrong. Strike the
“grimly,” add a comma and the following: but one of the marks ofi
Philip Dick’s mastery lies in the tone of his work. He is possessed of a j
sense of humour for which I am unable to locate an appropriate ad-1
jective. Wry, grotesque, slapstick, satirical, ironic . . . None of them
quite fits to the point of generality, though all may be found without
looking too far. His characters take pratfalls at the most serious mo¬
ments; pathetic irony may invade the most comic scene. It is a rare
and estimable quality to direct such a show successfully.






Who else in this cockeyed universe could design a society thriving
on the bridge-playing abilities of its leaders, with the delightful rule
that a husband and wife team may undergo instant divorce at the

I end of a bad game? Or throw in a car that nags its owner for oil

)

changes, tuneups, and new tires? 1 see you’ve already guessed. The
book is The Game-Players of Titan. —Or a story which opens with a

i

I psychoanalyst diagnosing his patient as a typical paranoid for believ-
I ing he is being followed, has his telephone tapped and that everyone
hates him—until the analyst realises who the man is, understands
I that he probably is under surveillance and is suddenly overwhelmed
i with hatred for him. The patient is Doctor Bloodmoney, in the book
of the same name, a kaleidoscopically brilliant piece of story-telling.

Three of my other personal favorites are:

Uhik —which Larry Ashmead at Doubleday thrust into my hands one
I afternoon with excitement and a smile, telling me 1 had to read it im-

I mediately. 1 began it on the train back to Baltimore that evening and

1 ;

j could have wound up in Cincinnati or Kansas City had it not been for
j a conductor who might have understudied Jerome Hines.

\Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? ^ a book I read at a more sta-
I tionary single sitting, and whose title occasionally runs through my
j head to the tune of “Greensleeves.” 1 am not certain why. The tune, 1
I mean. The single sitting part becomes self-explanatory on opening

I

j the book.

Galactic Pot-Healer —When the encyclopedia defines a particular
creature as the dominant life-form on a certain planet and then
points out that the species only consists of one member . . . This one
is almost whimsical. But not quite. A Philip Dick book can never be
categorised that neatly. But this one is a bit special in the focussing
! of its humours (Elizabethan usage) and in the almost pastoral quality
I of certain sections.

J By mentioning these personal favourites, 1 do not intend to detract
i from his other works. 1 have read almost all of Philip Dick’s stories and










X


INTRODUCTION


I have never put down a single one with that feeling all readers know at
some time or other, that a writer has cheated, has taken an easy way
out, rather than addressing himself with his full abihties to the issues he
has invoked. Phihp Dick is an honest writer in this respect—or, if 1 am
wrong and he does ever handle something in the other fashion, then it
is a tribute to his artistry that he succeeds so well in concealing it.

Inventiveness. Wit. Artistic integrity. Three very good things to
have. To say them, however, is perhaps to talk more about the mind
behind the words than the ends to which they are addressed. For to
say them in all good-intentioned honesty about a story results mainly
in a heaping of abstractions.

A story is a series of effects. 1 owned at the beginning that Philip
Dick’s effects fascinate me even more than the social discontents
pulsing through the neon tube in front of the wrinkled mirror sus¬
pended by the piano wire from the windmill of his mind. He is a
writer’s writer, rich enough in fancy that he can afford to throw
away in a paragraph ideas another writer might build a book upon. I
cannot detail these effects. But then, 1 could not have written the la¬
bel for the Ubik can either. It is the variety and near-surreal aptness
of his juxtapositions which defend this matter, too, against facile cat¬
egorisation. The subjective response, however, when a Philip Dick
book has been finished and put aside is that, upon reflection, it does
not seem so much that one holds the memory of a story; rather, it is
the after effects of a poem rich in metaphor that seem to remain.

This 1 value, partly because it does defy a full mapping, but mainly
because that which is left of a Philip Dick story when the details have
been forgotten is a thing which comes to me at odd times and offers
me a feeling or a thought; therefore, a thing which leaves me richer
for having known it.















AUCKLAND


A TURTLE WHICH EXPLORER CAPTAIN COOK GAVE TO
THE KING OF TONGA IN 1777 DIED YESTERDAY. IT

WAS NEARLY 200 YEARS OLD.

THE ANIMAL, CALLED TU’IMALILA, DIED AT THE
ROYAL PALACE GROUND IN THE TONGAN

CAPITAL OF NUKU, ALOFA.

THE PEOPLE OF TONGA REGARDED THE ANIMAL AS A
CHIEF. AND SPECIAL KEEPERS WERE APPOINTED TO

LOOK AFTER IT. IT WAS BLINDED IN A
BUSH FIRE A FEW YEARS AGO.

TONGA RADIO SAID TU’IMALILA’S CARCASS WOULD BE
SENT TO THE AUCKLAND MUSEUM IN NEW ZEALAND.

Reuters, 1966












t


1 .

f


A merry little surge of electricity piped by automatic alarm
from the mood organ beside his bed awakened Rick Deck-
ard. Surprised—it always surprised him to find himself
awake without prior notice—he rose from the bed, stood
up in his multicolored pajamas, and stretched. Now, in her
bed, his wife Iran opened her gray, unmerry eyes, blinked,
then groaned and shut her eyes again.

“You set your Penfield too weak,” he said to her. “I’ll re¬
set it and you’ll be awake and—”

“Keep your hand off my settings.” Her voice held bitter
sharpness. “I don’t want to be awake.”

He seated himself beside her, bent over her, and ex¬
plained softly. “If you set the surge up high enough, you’ll
be glad you’re awake; that’s the whole point. At setting C it
overcomes the threshold barring consciousness, as it does
for me.” Friendlily, because he felt well-disposed toward
the world —his setting had been at D —he patted her bare,
pale shoulder.

“Get your crude cop’s hand away,” Iran said.


3
















4


PHILIP K. DICK


“I’m not a cop.” He felt irritable, now, although he hadn’t
dialed for it.

“You’re worse,” his wife said, her eyes still shut.
“You’re a murderer hired by the cops.”

“I’ve never killed a human being in my life.” His irri¬
tability had risen now; had become outright hostility.

Iran said, “Just those poor andys.”

“I notice you’ve never had any hesitation as to spending
the bounty money I bring home on whatever momentarily
attracts your attention.” He rose, strode to the console of his
mood organ. “Instead of saving,” he said, “so we could buy
a real sheep, to replace that fake electric one upstairs. A
mere electric animal, and me earning all that I’ve worked
my way up to through the years.” At his console he hesi¬
tated between dialing for a thalamic suppressant (which
would abolish his mood of rage) or a thalamic stimulant
(which would make him irked enough to win the argument).

“If you dial,” Iran said, eyes open and watching, “for
greater venom, then I’ll dial the same. I’ll dial the maxi¬
mum and you’ll see a fight that makes every argument
we’ve had up to now seem like nothing. Dial and see; just
try me.” She rose swiftly, loped to the console of her own
mood organ, stood glaring at him, waiting.

He sighed, defeated by her threat. “I’ll dial what’s on
my schedule for today.” Examining the schedule for Janu¬
ary 3, 2021, he saw that a businesslike professional atti¬
tude was called for. “If I dial by schedule,” he said warily,
“will you agree to also?” He waited, canny enough not to
commit himself until his wife had agreed to follow suit.

“My schedule for today lists a six-hour self-accusatory
depression,” Iran said.







DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


5


“What? Why did you schedule that?” It defeated the
whole purpose of the mood organ. “I didn’t even know you
could set it for that,” he said gloomily.

“I was sitting here one afternoon,” Iran said, “and natu¬
rally I had turned on ‘Buster Friendly and His Friendly
Friends’ and he was talking about a big news item he’s
about to break and then that awful commercial came on,
the one I hate; you know, for Mountibank Lead Codpieces.
And so for a minute I shut off the sound. And I heard the
building, this building; I heard the—” She gestured.

“Empty apartments,” Rick said. Sometimes he heard
them at night when he was supposed to be asleep. And
yet, for this day and age a one-half occupied conapt build¬
ing rated high in the scheme of population density; out in
what had been before the war the suburbs, one could find
buildings entirely empty ... or so he had heard. He had let
the information remain secondhand; like most people he
did not care to experience it directly.

“At that moment,” Iran said, “when I had the TV sound
off, I was in a 382 mood; I had just dialed it. So although I
heard the emptiness intellectually, I didn’t feel it. My first
reaction consisted of being grateful that we could afford a
Penfield mood organ. But then I realized how unhealthy it
was, sensing the absence of life, not just in this building but
everywhere, and not reacting—do you see? I guess you
don’t. But that used to be considered a sign of mental ill¬
ness; they called it ‘absence of appropriate affect.’ So I left
the TV sound off and I sat down at my mood organ and I ex¬
perimented. And I finally found a setting for despair.” Her
dark, pert face showed satisfaction, as if she had achieved
something of worth. “So I put it on my schedule for twice a








6


PHILIP K. DICK


month; I think that’s a reasonable amount of time to feel
hopeless about everything, about staying here on Earth af¬
ter everybody who’s smart has emigrated, don’t you think?”

“But a mood like that,” Rick said, “you’re apt to stay in
it, not dial your way out. Despair like that, about total re¬
ality, is snlf-perpetuating.”

“1 program an automatic resetting for three hours later,”
his wife said sleekly. “A 481. Awareness of the manifold
possibilities open to me in the future; new hope that—”

“1 know 481,” he interrupted. He had dialed out the com¬
bination many times; he relied on it greatly. “Listen,” he
said, seating himself on his bed and taking hold of her
hands to draw her down beside him, “even with an auto¬
matic cutoff it’s dangerous to undergo a depression, any
kind. Forget what you’ve scheduled and I’ll forget what I’ve
scheduled; we’ll dial a 104 together and both experience it,
and then you stay in it while 1 reset mine for my usual busi¬
nesslike attitude. That way I’ll want to hop up to the roof
and check out the sheep and then head for the office; mean¬
while I’ll know you’re not sitting here brooding with no TV.”
He released her slim, long fingers, passed through the spa¬
cious apartment to the living room, which smelled faintly of
last night’s cigarettes. There he bent to turn on the TV.

From the bedroom Iran’s voice came. “I can’t stand TV
before breakfast.”

“Dial 888,” Rick said as the set warmed. “The desire to
watch TV, no matter what’s on it.”

“I don’t feel like dialing anything at all now,” Iran said.

“Then dial 3,” he said.

“I can’t dial a setting that stimulates my cerebral cortex
into wanting to dial! If I don’t want to dial, I don’t want to







DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


7


dial that most of all, because then 1 will want to dial, and
wanting to dial is right now the most alien drive 1 can
imagine; I just want to sit here on the bed and stare at the
floor.” Her voice had become sharp with overtones of
bleakness as her soul congealed and she ceased to move,
as the instinctive, omnipresent film of great weight, of an
almost absolute inertia, settled over her.

He turned up the TV sound, and the voice of Buster
Friendly boomed out and filled the room. “—ho ho, folks.
Time now for a brief note on today’s weather. The Mon¬
goose satellite reports that fallout will be especially pro¬
nounced toward noon and will then taper off, so all you
folks who’ll be venturing out—”

Appearing beside him, her long nightgown trailing
wispily, Iran shut off the TV set. “Okay, 1 give up; I’ll dial.
Anything you want me to be; ecstatic sexual bliss—1 feel so
bad I’ll even endure that. What the hell. What difference
does it make?”

“I’ll dial for both of us,” Rick said, and led her back into
the bedroom. There, at her console, he dialed 594: pleased
acknowledgment of husband’s superior wisdom in all mat¬
ters. On his own console he dialed for a creative and fresh
attitude toward his job, although this he hardly needed;
such was his habitual, innate approach without recourse
to Penfield artificial brain stimulation.

After a hurried breakfast—he had lost time due to the dis¬
cussion wdth his wife—he ascended clad for venturing out,
including his Ajax model Mountibank Lead Codpiece, to the
covered roof pasture whereon his electric sheep “grazed.”
Whereon it, sophisticated piece of hardware that it was.










8


PHILIP K. DICK


chomped away in simulated contentment, bamboozling the
other tenants of the building.

Of course, some of their animals undoubtedly consisted of
electronic circuitry fakes, too; he had of course never nosed
into the matter, any more than they, his neighbors, had
pried into the real workings of his sheep. Nothing could be
more impolite. To say, “Is your sheep genuine?” would be a
worse breach of manners than to inquire whether a citizen’s
teeth, hair, or internal organs would test out authentic.

The morning air, spilling over with radioactive motes,
gray and sun-beclouding, belched about him, haunting his
nose; he sniffed involuntarily the taint of death. Well, that
was too strong a description for'it, he decided as he made
his way to the particular plot of sod which he owned along
with the unduly large apartment below. The legacy of
World War Terminus had diminished in potency; those
who could not survive the dust had passed into oblivion
years ago, and the dust, weaker now and confronting the
strong survivors, only deranged minds and genetic proper¬
ties. Despite his lead codpiece, the dust—undoubtedly—fil¬
tered in and at him, brought him daily, so long as he failed
to emigrate, its little load of befouling filth. So far, medical
checkups taken monthly confirmed him as a regular: a
man who could reproduce within the tolerances set by
law. Any month, however, the exam by the San Francisco
Police Department doctors could reveal otherwise. Contin¬
ually, new specials came into existence, created out of reg¬
ulars by the omnipresent dust. The saying currently
blabbed by posters, TV ads, and government junk mail,
ran: “Emigrate or degenerate! The choice is yours!” Very
true, Rick thought as he opened the gate to his little pas-











DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP? 9

j'

i

I

1

ture and approached his electric sheep. But I can’t emi-

j

grate, he said to himself. Because of my job.

The owner of the adjoining pasture, his conapt neighbor
, Bill Barbour, hailed him; he, like Rick, had dressed for work
I but had stopped off on the way to check his animal, too.

“My horse,” Barbour declared beamingly, “is pregnant.”
He indicated the big Percheron, which stood staring off in
an empty fashion into space. “What do you say to that?”

I “1 say pretty soon you’ll have two horses,” Rick said. He

! had reached his sheep now; it lay ruminating, its alert

I eyes fixed on him in case he had brought any rolled oats

I with him. The alleged sheep contained an oat-tropic cir¬

cuit; at the sight of such cereals it would scramble up con¬
vincingly and amble over. “What’s she pregnant by?” he
asked Barbour. “The wind?”

“1 bought some of the highest quality fertilizing plasma
available in California,” Barbour informed him. “Through
inside contacts 1 have with the State Animal Husbandry
1 Board. Don’t you remember last week when their inspec-

j tor was out here examining Judy? They’re eager to have

[ her foal; she’s an unmatched superior.” Barbour thumped

I his horse fondly on the neck and she inclined her head

toward him.

“Ever thought of selling your horse?” Rick asked. He
wished to god he had a horse, in fact any animal. Owning
and maintaining a fraud had a way of gradually demoral¬
izing one. And yet from a social standpoint it had to be
I done, given the absence of the real article. He had there-

I fore no choice except to continue. Even were he not to

j care himself, there remained his wife, and Iran did care.

I Very much.
















10


PHILIP K. DICK


Barbour said, “It would be immoral to sell my horse.”

“Sell the colt, then. Having two animals is more im¬
moral than not having any.”

Puzzled, Barbour said, “How do you mean? A lot of peo¬
ple have two animals, even three, four, and like in the case
of Fred Washborne, who owns the algae-processing plant
my brother works at, even five. Didn’t you see that article
about his duck in yesterday’s Chronicled It’s supposed to
be the heaviest, largest Moscovy on the West Coast.” The
man’s eyes glazed over, imagining such possessions; he
drifted by degrees into a trance.

Exploring about in his coat pockets, Rick found his
creased, much-studied copy of Sidney’s Animal &amp; Fowl
Catalogue January supplement. He looked in the index,
found colts (vide horses, offsp.) and presently had the pre¬
vailing national price. “I can buy a Percheron colt from
Sidney’s for five thousand dollars,” he said aloud.

“No you can’t,” Barbour said. “Look at the listing again;
it’s in italics. That means they don’t have any in stock, but
that would be the price if they did have.”

“Suppose,” Rick said, “I pay you five hundred dollars a
month for ten months. Full catalogue value.”

Pityingly, Barbour said, “Deckard, you don’t understand
about horses; there’s a reason why Sidney’s doesn’t have
any Percheron colts in stock. Percheron colts just don’t
change hands—at catalogue value, even. They’re too scarce,
even relatively inferior ones.” He leaned across their com¬
mon fence, gesticulating. “I’ve had Judy for three years, and
not in all that time have I seen a Percheron mare of her
quality. To acquire her I had to fly to Canada, and I person¬
ally drove her back here myself to make sure she wasn’t




DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


11


stolen. You bring an animal like this anywhere around Col¬
orado or Wyoming and they’ll knock you off to get hold of it.
You know why? Because back before W.W.T. there existed
hterally hundreds—”

“But,” Rick interrupted, “for you to have two horses and
me none, that violates the whole basic theological and
moral structure of Mercerism.”

“You have your sheep; hell, you can follow the Ascent in
your individual life, and when you grasp the two handles
of empathy, you approach honorably. Now if you didn’t
have that old sheep, there, I’d see some logic in your posi¬
tion. Sure, if 1 had two animals and you didn’t have any.
I’d be helping deprive you of true fusion with Mercer. But
every family in this building—let’s see; around fifty: one to
every three apts, as 1 compute it—every one of us has an
animal of some sort. Graveson has that chicken over
there.” He gestured north. “Oakes and his wife have that
big red dog that barks in the night.” He pondered. “1 think
Ed Smith has a cat down in his apt; at least he says so, but
no one’s ever seen it. Possibly he’s just pretending.”

Going over to his sheep, Rick bent down, searching in the
thick white wool—the fleece at least was genuine—until he
found what he was looking for: the concealed control panel
of the mechanism. As Barbour watched, he snapped open
the panel covering, revealing it. “See?” he said to Barbour.
“You understand now why 1 want your colt so badly?”

After an interval Barbour said, “You poor guy. Has it al¬
ways been this way?”

“No,” Rick said, once again closing the panel covering of
his electric sheep; he straightened up, turned, and faced
his neighbor. “I had a real sheep, originally. My wife’s fa-












12


PHILIP K. DICK


ther gave it to us outright when he emigrated. Then, about
a year ago, remember that time I took it to the vet—you
were up here that morning when I came out and found it
lying on its side and it couldn’t get up.”

“You got it to its feet,” Barbour said, remembering and
nodding. “Yeah, you managed to lift it up but then after a
minute or two of walking around it fell over again.”

Rick said, “Sheep get strange diseases. Or put another
way, sheep get a lot of diseases but the symptoms are al¬
ways the same; the sheep can’t get up and there’s no way
to tell how serious it is, whether it’s a sprained leg or the
animal’s dying of tetanus. That’s what mine died of:
tetanus.”

“Up here?” Barbour said. “On the roof?”

“The hay,” Rick explained. “That one time 1 didn’t get
all the wire off the bale; 1 left a piece and Groucho—that’s
what 1 called him then—got a scratch and in that way con¬
tracted tetanus. 1 took him to the vet’s and he died, and 1
thought about it, and finally I called one of those shops
that manufacture artificial animals and 1 showed them a
photograph of Groucho. They made this.” He indicated the
reclining ersatz animal, which continued to ruminate at¬
tentively, still watching alertly for any indication of oats.
“It’s a premium job. And I’ve put as much time and atten¬
tion into caring for it as 1 did when it was real. But—” He
shrugged.

“It’s not the same,” Barbour finished.

“But almost. You feel the same doing it; you have to
keep your eye on it exactly as you did when it was really
alive. Because they break down and then everyone in the
building knows. I’ve had it at the repair shop six times.








DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


13


mostly little malfunctions, but if anyone saw them—for in¬
stance one time the voice tape broke or anyhow got fouled
and it wouldn’t stop baaing—they’d recognize it as a me¬
chanical breakdown.” He added, “The repair outfit’s truck
is of course marked ‘animal hospital something.’ And the
driver dresses like a vet, completely in white.” He glanced
suddenly at his watch, remembering the time. “1 have to
get to work,” he said to Barbour. “I’ll see you this
evening.”

As he started toward his car, Barbour called after him
hurriedly, “Um, 1 won’t say anything to anybody here in
the building.”

Pausing, Rick started to say thanks. But then something
of the despair that Iran had been talking about tapped him
on the shoulder and he said, “1 don’t know; maybe it doesn’t
make any difference.”

“But they’ll look down on you. Not all of them, but some.
You know how people are about not taking care of an ani¬
mal; they consider it immoral and anti-empathic. 1 mean,
technically it’s not a crime like it was right after W.W.T.,
but the feeling’s still there.”

“God,” Rick said futilely, and gestured empty-handed. “1
want to have an animal; 1 keep trying to buy one. But on my
salary, on what a city employee makes—” If, he thought, 1
could get lucky in my work again. As 1 did two years ago
when 1 managed to bag four andys during one month. If 1
had knovm then, he thought, that Groucho was going to die
. . . but that had been before the tetanus. Before the two-
inch piece of broken, hypodermic-like baling wire.

“You could buy a cat,” Barbour offered. “Cats are cheap;
look in your Sidney’s catalogue.”













14


PHILfP K. DICK


Rick said quietly, “I don’t want a domestic pet. I want
what I originally had, a large animal. A sheep, or if I can
get the money, a cow or a steer or what you have, a horse.”
The bounty from retiring five andys would do it, he real¬
ized. A thousand dollars apiece, over and above my salary.
Then somewhere I could find, from someone, what I want.
Even if the listing in Sidney’s Animal &amp; Fowl is in ital¬
ics. Five thousand dollars—but, he thought, the five andys
first have to make their way to Earth from one of the
colony planets; I can’t control that, I can’t make five of
them come here, and even if I could, there are other
bounty hunters with other police agencies throughout the
world. The andys would specifically have to take up resi¬
dence in Northern California, and the senior bounty hunter
in this area, Dave Holden, would have to die or retire.

“Buy a cricket,” Barbour suggested wittily. “Or a
mouse. Hey, for twenty-five bucks you can buy a full-
grown mouse.”

Rick said, “Your horse could die, like Groucho died,
without warning. When you get home from work this
evening you could find her laid out on her back, her feet in
the air, like a bug. Like what you said, a cricket.” He
strode off, car key in his hand.

“Sorry if I offended you,” Barbour said nervously.

In silence Rick Deckard plucked open the door of his
hovercar. He had nothing further to say to his neighbor;
his mind was on his work, on the day ahead.






In a giant, empty, decaying building which had once
housed thousands, a single TV set hawked its wares to an
uninhabited room.

This ownerless ruin had, before World War Terminus,
been tended and maintained. Here had been the suburbs
of San Francisco, a short ride by monorail rapid transit;
the entire peninsula had chattered like a bird tree with life
and opinions and complaints, and now the watchful own¬
ers had either died or migrated to a colony world. Mostly
the former; it had been a costly war despite the valiant
predictions of the Pentagon and its smug scientific vassal,
the Rand Corporation—which had, in fact, existed not far
from this spot. Like the apartment owners, the corporation
had departed, evidently for good. No one missed it.

In addition, no one today remembered why the war had
come about or who, if anyone, had won. The dust which
had contaminated most of the planet’s surface had origi¬
nated in no country, and no one, even the wartime enemy,
had planned on it. First, strangely, the owls had died. At


15
















16


PHILIP K. DICK


the time it had seemed almost funny, the fat, fluffy white
birds lying here and there, in yards and on streets; coming
out no earlier than twilight, as they had while alive, the
owls escaped notice. Medieval plagues had manifested
themselves in a similar way, in the form of many dead
rats. This plague, however, had descended from above.

After the owls, of course, the other birds followed, but
by then the mystery had been grasped and understood. A
meager colonization program had been underway before
the war, but now that the sun had ceased to shine on
Earth, the colonization entered an entirely new phase. In
connection with this a weapon of war, the Synthetic Free¬
dom Fighter, had been modified; able to function on an
alien world, the humanoid robot—strictly speaking, the
organic android—had become the mobile donkey engine
of the colonization program. Under U.N. law each emi¬
grant automatically received possession of an android
subtype of his choice, and, by 2019, the variety of subtypes
passed all understanding, in the manner of American au¬
tomobiles of the 1960s.

That had been the ultimate incentive of emigration: the
android servant as carrot, the radioactive fallout as stick.
The U.N. had made it easy to emigrate, difficult if not im¬
possible to stay. Loitering on Earth potentially meant find¬
ing oneself abruptly classed as biologically unacceptable, a
menace to the pristine heredity of the race. Once pegged as
special, a citizen, even if accepting sterilization, dropped
out of history. He ceased, in effect, to be part of mankind.
And yet persons here and there declined to migrate; that,
even to those involved, constituted a perplexing irrational¬
ity. Logically, every regular should have emigrated already.





I

!

1

1

! DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP? 17

I

Perhaps, deformed as it was, Earth remained familiar, to he
clung to. Or possibly the non-emigrant imagined that the
tent of dust would deplete itself finally. In any case thou¬
sands of individuals remained, most of them constellated in
urban areas where they could physically see one another,
take heart at their mutual presence. Those appeared to be
the relatively sane ones. And, in dubious addition to them,
occasional peculiar entities remained in the virtually aban-
■ doned suburbs.

John Isidore, being yammered at by the television set in
I his living room as he shaved in the bathroom, was one of
these.

He simply had wandered to this spot in the early days fol¬
lowing the war. In those evil times no one had known,

I really, what they were doing. Populations, detached by the
war, had roamed, squatted temporarily at first one region
I and then another. Back then the fallout had been sporadic
and highly variable; some states had been nearly free of it,
others became saturated. The displaced populations moved
as the dust moved. The peninsula south of San Francisco
I had been at first dust-free, and a great body of persons had
I responded by taking up residence there; when the dust ar¬
rived, some had died and the rest had departed. J. R. Isidore
remained.

The TV set shouted, “—duplicates the halcyon days of
the pre-Civil War Southern states! Either as body ser-
I vants or tireless field hands, the custom-tailored hu-
I manoid robot—designed specifically for YOUR UNIQUE
! NEEDS, FOR YOU AND YOU ALONE—given to you on your

I arrival absolutely free, equipped fully, as specified by you

I before your departure from Earth; this loyal, trouble-free

I

e

s:

3

I.









18


PHILIP K. DICK


companion in the greatest, boldest adventure contrived
by man in modern history will provide—” It continued on
and on.

1 wonder if I’m late for work, Isidore wondered as he
scraped. He did not own a working clock; generally he de¬
pended on the TV for time signals, but today was Inter¬
space Horizons Day, evidently. Anyhow the TV claimed
this to be the fifth (or sixth?) anniversary of the founding
of New America, the chief U.S. settlement on Mars. And
his TV set, being partly broken, picked up only the channel
which had been nationalized during the war and still re¬
mained SO; the government in Washington, with its colo¬
nization program, constituted the sole sponsor which
Isidore found himself forced to listen to.

“Let’s hear from Mrs. Maggie Klugman,” the TV an¬
nouncer suggested to John Isidore, who wanted only to
know the time. “A recent immigrant to Mars, Mrs. Klug¬
man in an interview taped live in New New York had this to
say. Mrs. Klugman, how would you contrast your fife back
on contaminated Earth with your new life here in a world
rich with every imaginable possibility?” A pause, and then
a tired, dry, middle-aged, female voice said, “I think what I
and my family of three noticed most was the dignity.” “The
dignity, Mrs. Klugman?” the announcer asked. “Yes,” Mrs.
Klugman, now of New New York, Mars, said. “It’s a hard
thing to explain. Having a servant you can depend on in
these troubled times ... I find it reassuring.”

“Back on Earth, Mrs. Klugman, in the old days, did you
also worry about finding yourself classified, ahem, as a
special?”

“Oh, my husband and myself worried ourselves nearly




DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


19


to death. Of course, once we emigrated that worry van¬
ished, fortunately forever.”

To himself John Isidore thought acidly. And it’s gone
away for me, too, without my having to emigrate. He had
been a special now for over a year, and not merely in re¬
gard to the distorted genes which he carried. Worse still,
he had failed to pass the minimum mental faculties test,
which made him in popular parlance a chickenhead. Upon
him the contempt of three planets descended. However,
despite this, he survived. He had his job, driving a pickup
and delivery truck for a false-animal repair firm; the Van
Ness Pet Hospital and his gloomy, gothic boss Hannibal
Sloat accepted him as human and this he appreciated.
Mors certa, vita incerta, as Mr. Sloat occasionally de¬
clared. Isidore, although he had heard the expression a
number of times, retained only a dim notion as to its
meaning. After all, if a chickenhead could fathom Latin he
would cease to be a chickenhead. Mr. Sloat, when this was
pointed out to him, acknowledged its truth. And there ex¬
isted chickenheads infinitely stupider than Isidore, who
could hold no jobs at all, who remained in custodial insti¬
tutions quaintly called “Institute of Special Trade Skills of
America,” the word “special” having to get in there some¬
how, as always.

“—your husband felt no protection,” the TV announcer
was saying, “in owning and continually wearing an ex¬
pensive and clumsy radiation-proof lead codpiece, Mrs.
Klugman?”

“My husband,” Mrs. Klugman began, but at that point,
having finished shaving, Isidore strode into the living room
and shut off the TV set.













20


PHILIP K. DICK


Silence. It flashed from the woodwork and the walls; it
smote him with an awful, total power, as if generated by a
vast mill. It rose from the floor, up out of the tattered gray
wall-to-wall carpeting. It unleashed itself from the broken
and semi-broken appliances in the kitchen, the dead ma¬
chines which hadn’t worked in all the time Isidore had
lived here. From the useless pole lamp in the living room it
oozed out, meshing with the empty and wordless descent
of itself from the fly-specked ceiling. It managed in fact to
emerge from every object within his range of vision, as if
it—the silence—meant to supplant all things tangible.
Hence it assailed not only his ears but his eyes; as he stood
by the inert TV set he experienced the silence as visible
and, in its own way, alive. Alive! He had often felt its aus¬
tere approach before; when it came, it burst in without
subtlety, evidently unable to wait. The silence of the world
could not rein back its greed. Not any longer. Not when it
had virtually won.

He wondered, then, if the others who had remained on
Earth experienced the void this way. Or was it peculiar to
his peculiar biological identity, a freak generated by his
inept sensory apparatus? Interesting question, Isidore
thought. But whom could he compare notes with? He lived
alone in this deteriorating, blind building of a thousand
uninhabited apartments, which like all its counterparts,
fell, day by day, into greater entropic ruin. Eventually
everything within the building would merge, would be
faceless and identical, mere pudding-like kipple piled to
the ceiling of each apartment. And, after that, the un¬
cared-for building itself would settle into shapelessness,
buried under the ubiquity of the dust. By then, naturally.





DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


21


he himself would be dead, another interesting event to an¬
ticipate as he stood here in his stricken living room alone
with the lungless, all-penetrating, masterful world-silence.

Better, perhaps, to turn the TV back on. But the ads, di¬
rected at the remaining regulars, frightened him. They in¬
formed him in a countless procession of ways that he, a
special, wasn’t wanted. Had no use. Could not, even if he
wanted to, emigrate. So why listen to that? he asked him¬
self irritably. Fork them and their colonization; 1 hope a
war gets started there—after all, it theoretically could—
and they wind up like Earth. And everybody who emi¬
grated turns out to be special.

Okay, he thought; I’m off to work. He reached for the
doorknob that opened the way out into the unlit hall, then
shrank back as he glimpsed the vacuity of the rest of the
building. It lay in wait for him, out here, the force which
he had felt busily penetrating his specific apartment. God,
he thought, and reshut the door. He was not ready for the
trip up those clanging stairs to the empty roof where he
had no animal. The echo of himself ascending: the echo of
nothing. Time to grasp the handles, he said to himself, and
crossed the living room to the black empathy box.

When he turned it on, the usual faint smell of negative
ions surged from the power supply; he breathed in ea¬
gerly, already buoyed up. Then the cathode-ray tube
glowed like an imitation, feeble TV image; a collage
formed, made of apparently random colors, trails, and
configurations which, until the handles were grasped,
amounted to nothing. So, taking a deep breath to steady
himself, he grasped the twin handles.

The visual image congealed; he saw at once a famous
















22


PHILIP K. DICK


landscape, the old, brown, barren ascent, with tufts of
dried-out bonelike weeds poking slantedly into a dim and
sunless sky. One single figure, more or less human in
form, toiled its way up the hillside: an elderly man wear¬
ing a dull, featureless robe, covering as meager as if it had
been snatched from the hostile emptiness of the sky. The
man, Wilbur Mercer, plodded ahead, and, as he clutched
the handles, John Isidore gradually experienced a waning
of the living room in which he stood; the dilapidated furni¬
ture and walls ebbed out and he ceased to experience
them at all. He found himself, instead, as always before,
entering into the landscape of drab hill, drab sky. And at
the same time he no longer witnessed the climb of the el¬
derly man. His own feet now scraped, sought purchase,
among the familiar loose stones; he felt the same old
painful, irregular roughness beneath his feet and once
again smelled the acrid haze of the sky—not Earth’s sky
but that of some place alien, distant, and yet, by means of
the empathy box, instantly available.

He had crossed over in the usual perplexing fashion;
physical merging—accompanied by mental and spiritual
identification—with Wilbur Mercer had reoccurred. As it
did for everyone who at this moment clutched the handles,
either here on Earth or on one of the colony planets. He
experienced them, the others, incorporated the babble of
their thoughts, heard in his own brain the noise of their
many individual existences. They—and he—cared about
one thing; this fusion of their mentalities oriented their at¬
tention on the hill, the climb, the need to ascend. Step by
step it evolved, so slowly as to be nearly imperceptible. But
it was there. Higher, he thought as stones rattled down-












DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


23


1


I ward under his feet. Today we are higher than yesterday,
and tomorrow—he, the compound figure of Wilbur Mer-
I cer, glanced up to view the ascent ahead. Impossible to
make out the end. Too far. But it would come.

I A rock, hurled at him, struck his arm. He felt the pain.

I He half turned and another rock sailed past him, missing

i

him; it collided with the earth and the sound startled him.

I Who? he wondered, peering to see his tormentor. The old
I antagonists, manifesting themselves at the periphery of
his vision; it, or they, had followed him all the way up the
hill and they would remain until at the top—

He remembered the top, the sudden leveling of the hill,

I when the climb ceased and the other part of it began. How
many times had he done this? The several times blurred;
future and past blurred; what he had already experienced
and what he would eventually experience blended so that
nothing remained but the moment, the standing still and
resting during which he rubbed the cut on his arm which
the stone had left. God, he thought in weariness. In what
I way is this fair? Why am 1 up here alone like this, being
tormented by something I can’t even see? And then, within
him, the mutual babble of everyone else in fusion broke
the illusion of aloneness.

You felt it, too, he thought. Yes, the voices answered. We
I got hit, on the left arm; it hurts like hell. Okay, he said. We
better get started moving again. He resumed walking, and
all of them accompanied him immediately.

I Once, he remembered, it had been different. Back be-

I fore the curse had come, an earlier, happier part of life.

They, his foster parents Frank and Cora Mercer, had
f found him floating on an inflated rubber air-rescue raft,

I

h

i'









24


PHILIP K. DICK


off the coast of New England ... or had it been Mexico,
near the port of Tampico? He did not now remember the
circumstances. Childhood had been nice; he had loved all
life, especially the animals, had in fact been able for a time
to bring dead animals back as they had been. He lived
with rabbits and bugs, wherever it was, either on Earth or
a colony world; now he had forgotten that, too. But he re¬
called the killers, because they had arrested him as a
freak, more special than any of the other specials. And due
to that, everything had changed.

Local law prohibited the time-reversal faculty by which
the dead returned to life; they had spelled it out to him
during his sixteenth year. He continued for another year
to do it secretly, in the still remaining woods, but an old
woman whom he had never seen or heard of had told.
Without his parents’ consent they—the killers—had bom¬
barded the unique nodule which had formed in his brain,
had attacked it with radioactive cobalt, and this had
plunged him into a different world, one whose existence
he had never suspected. It had been a pit of corpses and
dead bones and he had struggled for years to get up from
it. The donkey and especially the toad, the creatures most
important to him, had vanished, had become extinct; only
rotting fragments, an eyeless head here, part of a hand
there, remained. At last a bird which had come there to
die told him where he was. He had sunk dovm into the
tomb world. He could not get out until the bones strewn
around him grew back into living creatures; he had be¬
come joined to the metabolism of other lives, and until
they rose he could not rise either.

How long that part of the cycle had lasted he did not now











1


! DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP? 25

i

! know; nothing had happened, generally, so it had been
measureless. But at last the bones had regained flesh; the
empty eyepits had filled up and the new eyes had seen,
while meantime the restored beaks and mouths had cack-
I led, barked, and caterwauled. Possibly he had done it; per-

I haps the extrasensory node of his brain had finally grown

]'

back. Or maybe he hadn’t accomplished it; very likely it

I

could have been a natural process. Anyhow he was no
longer sinking; he had begun to ascend, along with the oth-
j ers. Long ago he had lost sight of them. He found himself
evidently climbing alone. But they were there. They still
accompanied him; he felt them, strangely, inside him.

I Isidore stood holding the two handles, experiencing him-

j self as encompassing every other living thing, and then, re¬
luctantly, he let go. It had to end, as always, and anyhow
his arm ached and bled where the rock had struck it.

Releasing the handles, he examined his arm, then made
his way unsteadily to the bathroom of his apartment to
wash the cut off. This was not the first wound he had re¬
ceived while in fusion vsdth Mercer, and it probably would
I not be the last. People, especially elderly ones, had died,
particularly later on at the top of the hill when the torment
I began in earnest. I wonder if I can go through that part
again, he said to himself as he swabbed the injury. Chance
of cardiac arrest; be better, he reflected, if I lived in town
where those buildings have a doctor standing by with
those electro-spark machines. Here, alone in this place,

I it’s too risky.

! But he knew he’d take the risk. He always had before.

I As did most people, even oldsters who were physically

[ fragile.

I

ii











26


PHILIP K. DICK


Using a Kleenex, he dried his damaged arm.

And heard, muffled and far off, a TV set.

It’s someone else in this building, he thought wildly, un¬
able to believe it. Not my TV; that’s off, and I can feel the
floor resonance. It’s below, on another level entirely!

Vm not alone here any more, he realized. Another resi¬
dent has moved in, taken one of the abandoned apart¬
ments, and close enough for me to hear him. Must be level
two or level three, certainly no deeper. Let’s see, he
thought rapidly. What do you do when a new resident
moves in? Drop by and borrow something, is that how it’s
done? He could not remember; this had never happened to
him before, here or anywhere else: people moved out, peo¬
ple emigrated, but nobody ever moved in. You take them
something, he decided. Like a cup of water or rather milk;
yes, it’s milk or flour or maybe an egg—or, specifically,
their ersatz substitutes.

Looking in his refrigerator—the compressor had long
since ceased working—he found a dubious cube of mar¬
garine. And, with it, set off excitedly, his heart laboring,
for the level below. I have to keep calm, he realized. Not
let him know I’m a chickenhead. If he finds out I’m a
chickenhead he won’t talk to me; that’s always the way it
is for some reason. I wonder why?

He hurried down the hall.








On his way to work Rick Deckard, as lord knew how many
other people, stopped briefly to skulk about in front of one
of San Francisco’s larger pet shops, along animal row. In
the center of the block-long display window an ostrich, in
a heated clear-plastic cage, returned his stare. The bird,
according to the info plaque attached to the cage, had just
arrived from a zoo in Cleveland. It was the only ostrich on
the West Coast. After staring at it, Rick spent a few more
minutes staring grimly at the price tag. He then continued
on to the Hall of Justice on Lombard Street and found him¬
self a quarter of an hour late to work.

As he unlocked his office door, his superior. Police In¬
spector Harry Bryant, jug-eared and redheaded, sloppily
dressed but wise-eyed and conscious of nearly everything
of any importance, hailed him. “Meet me at nine-thirty in
Dave Holden’s office.” Inspector Bryant, as he spoke,
flicked briefly through a clipboard of onionskin typed
sheets. “Holden,” he continued as he started off, “is in
Mount Zion Hospital with a laser track through his spine.


27









28


PHILIP K. DICK


He’ll be there for a month at least. Until they can get one
of those new organic plastic spinal sections to take hold.”

“What happened?” Rick asked, chilled. The depart¬
ment’s chief bounty hunter had been all right yesterday; at
the end of the day he had as usual zipped off in his hover-
car to his apartment in the crowded high-prestige Nob Hill
area of the city.

Bryant muttered over his shoulder something about
nine-thirty in Dave’s office and departed, leaving Rick
standing alone.

As he entered his own office, Rick heard the voice of his
secretary, Ann Marsten, behind him. “Mr. Deckard, you
know what happened to Mr. Holden? He got shot.” She fol¬
lowed after him into the stuffy, closed-up office and set the
air-filtering unit into motion.

“Yeah,” he responded absently.

“It must have been one of those new, extra-clever andys
the Rosen Association is turning out,” Miss Marsten said.
“Did you read over the company’s brochure and the spec
sheets? The Nexus-6 brain unit they’re using now is capa¬
ble of selecting within a field of two trillion constituents, or
ten million separate neural pathways.” She lowered her
voice. “You missed the vidcall this morning. Miss Wild told
me; it came through the switchboard exactly at nine.”

“A call in?” Rick asked.

Miss Marsten said, “A call out by Mr. Bryant to the
W.P.O. in Russia. Asking them if they would be willing to
file a formal written complaint with the Rosen Associa¬
tion’s factory representative East.”

“Harry still wants the Nexus-6 brain unit withdrawn
from the market?” He felt no surprise. Since the initial re-







DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


29


lease of its specifications and performance charts back in
August of 2020, most police agencies which dealt with es¬
caped andys had been protesting. “The Soviet police can’t
do any more than we can,” he said. Legally, the manufac¬
turers of the Nexus-6 brain unit operated under colonial
law, their parent autofactory being on Mars. “We had bet¬
ter just accept the new unit as a fact of life,” he said. “It’s
always been this way, with every improved brain unit
that’s come along. I remember the howls of pain when the
Sudermann people showed their old T-14 back in ’18.
Every police agency in the Western Hemisphere clamored
that no test would detect its presence, in an instance of il¬
legal entry here. As a matter of fact, for a while they were
right.” Over fifty of the T-14 android as he recalled had
made their way by one means or another to Earth, and
had not been detected for a period in some cases up to an
entire year. But then the Voigt Empathy Test had been de¬
vised by the Pavlov Institute working in the Soviet Union.
And no T-14 android—insofar, at least, as was known—
had managed to pass that particular test.

“Want to know what the Russian police said?” Miss
Marsten asked. “1 know that, too.” Her freckled, orange
face glowed.

Rick said, “I’ll find out from Harry Bryant.” He felt irri¬
table; office gossip annoyed him because it always proved
better than the truth. Seating himself at his desk, he point¬
edly fished about in a drawer until Miss Marsten, perceiv¬
ing the hint, departed.

From the drawer he produced an ancient, creased
manila envelope. Leaning back, tilting his important-style
chair, he rummaged among the contents of the envelope












30


PHILIP K. DICK


until he came across what he wanted: the collected, extant
data on the Nexus-6.

A moment’s reading vindicated Miss Marsten’s state¬
ment; the Nexus-6 did have two trillion constituents plus a
choice within a range of ten million possible combinations
of cerebral activity. In .45 of a second an android
equipped with such a brain structure could assume any
one of fourteen basic reaction-postures. Well, no intelli¬
gence test would trap such an andy. But then, intelligence
tests hadn’t trapped an andy in years, not since the pri¬
mordial, crude varieties of the 1970s.

The Nexus-6 android types, Rick reflected, surpassed sev¬
eral classes of human specials in terms of intelligence. In
other words, androids equipped with the new Nexus-6 brain
unit had from a sort of rough, pragmatic, no-nonsense
standpoint evolved beyond a major—^but inferior—segment
of mankind. For better or worse. The servant had in some
cases become more adroit than its master. But new scales
of achievement, for example the Voigt-Kampff Empathy
Test, had emerged as criteria by which to judge. An android,
no matter how gifted as to pure intellectual capacity,
could make no sense out of the fusion which took place
routinely among the followers of Mercerism—an experience
which he, and virtually everyone else, including subnormal
chickenheads, managed with no difficulty.

He had wondered, as had most people at one time or
another, precisely why an android bounced helplessly
about when confronted by an empathy-measuring test.
Empathy, evidently, existed only within the human com¬
munity, whereas intelligence to some degree could be
found throughout every phylum and order including the














DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


31


arachnida. For one thing, the empathic faculty probably
required an unimpaired group instinct; a solitary organ¬
ism, such as a spider, would have no use for it; in fact it
would tend to abort a spider’s ability to survive. It would
make him conscious of the desire to live on the part of his
prey. Hence all predators, even highly developed mam¬
mals such as cats, would starve.

Empathy, he once had decided, must be limited to her¬
bivores or anyhow omnivores who could depart from a
meat diet. Because, ultimately, the empathic gift blurred
the boundaries between hunter and victim, between the
successful and the defeated. As in the fusion with Mercer,
everyone ascended together or, when the cycle had come
to an end, fell together into the trough of the tomb world.
Oddly, it resembled a sort of biological insurance, but
double-edged. As long as some creature experienced joy,
then the condition for all other creatures included a frag¬
ment of joy. However, if any living being suffered, then for
all the rest the shadow could not be entirely cast off. A
herd animal such as man would acquire a higher survival
factor through this; an owl or a cobra would be destroyed.

Evidently the humanoid robot constituted a solitary
predator.

Rick liked to think of them that way; it made his job
palatable. In retiring—i.e., killing—an andy, he did not vio¬
late the rule of life laid down by Mercer. You shall kill only
the killers, Mercer had told them the year empathy boxes
first appeared on Earth. And in Mercerism, as it evolved
into a full theology, the concept of The Killers had grown
insidiously. In Mercerism, an absolute evil plucked at the
threadbare cloak of the tottering, ascending old man, but












32


PHILIP K. DICK


it was never clear who or what this evil presence was. A
Mercerite sensed evil without understanding it. Put an¬
other way, a Mercerite was free to locate the nebulous
presence of The Killers wherever he saw fit. For Rick
Deckard an escaped humanoid robot, which had killed its
master, which had been equipped wdth an intelligence
greater than that of many human beings, which had no re¬
gard for animals, which possessed no ability to feel em-
pathic joy for another life form’s success or grief at its
defeat—that, for him, epitomized The Killers.

Thinking about animals reminded him of the ostrich he
had seen in the pet store. Temporarily he pushed away the
specs on the Nexus-6 brain unit, took a pinch of Mrs. Sid-
dons’ No. 3 &amp; 4 snuff and cogitated. Then he examined his
watch, saw that he had time; he picked up his desk vid-
phone and said to Miss Marsten, “Get me the Happy Dog
Pet Shop on Sutter Street.”

“Yes, sir,” Miss Marsten said, and opened her phone book.

They can’t really want that much for the ostrich, Rick
said to himself. They expect you to car-trade, like in the
old days.

“Happy Dog Pet Shop,” a man’s voice declared, and on
Rick’s vidscreen a minute happy face appeared. Animals
could be heard bawling.

“That ostrich you have in your display window,” Rick
said; he toyed with a ceramic ashtray before him on the
desk. “What sort of a down payment would 1 need for that?”

“Let’s see,” the animal salesman said, groping for a pen
and pad of paper. “One-third down.” He figured. “May I
ask, sir, if you’re going to trade something in?”

Guardedly, Rick said, “1—haven’t decided.”







DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


33


“Let’s say we put the ostrich on a thirty-month con¬
tract,” the salesman said. “At a low, low interest rate of six
percent a month. That would make your monthly pay¬
ment, after a reasonable down—”

“You’ll have to lower the price you’re asking,” Rick
said. “Knock off two thousand and I won’t trade anything
in; I’ll come up with cash.” Dave Holden, he reflected, is
out of action. That could mean a great deal . . . depending
on how many assignments show up during the coming
month.

“Sir,” the animal salesman said, “our asking price is al¬
ready a thousand dollars under book. Check your Sid¬
ney’s', I’ll hang on. I want you to see for yourself, sir, that
our price is fair.”

Christ, Rick thought. They’re standing firm. However,
just for the heck of it, he wiggled his bent Sidney’s out of his
coat pocket, thumbed to ostrich comma male-female, old-
young, sick-well, mint-used, and inspected the prices.

“Mint, male, young, well,” the salesman informed him.
“Thirty thousand dollars.” He, too, had his Sidney’s out.
“We’re exactly one thousand under book. Now, your down
payment—”

“I’ll think it over,” Rick said, “and call you back.” He
started to hang up.

“Your name, sir?” the salesman asked alertly.

“Frank Merriwell,” Rick said.

“And your address, Mr. Merriwell? In case I’m not here
when you call back.”

He made up an address and put the vidphone receiver
back on its cradle. All that money, he thought. And yet,
people buy them; some people have that kind of money.








34


PHILIP K. DICK


Picking up the receiver again he said harshly, “Give me an
outside line, Miss Marsten. And don’t listen in on the con¬
versation; it’s confidential.” He glared at her.

“Yes, sir,” Miss Marsten said. “Go ahead and dial.” She
then cut herself out of the circuit, leaving him to face the
outside world.

He dialed—hy memory—the number of the false-animal
shop at which he had gotten his ersatz sheep. On the small
vidscreen a man dressed like a vet appeared. “Dr. McRae,”
the man declared.

“This is Deckard. How much is an electric ostrich?”

“Oh, I’d say we could fix you up for less than eight hun¬
dred dollars. How soon did you want delivery? We would
have to make it up for you; there’s not that much call for—”

“I’ll talk to you later,” Rick interrupted; glancing at his
watch he saw that nine-thirty had arrived. “Good-bye.” He
hurriedly hung up, rose, and shortly thereafter stood be¬
fore Inspector Bryant’s office door. He passed by Bryant’s
receptionist—attractive, with waist-length braided silver
hair—and then the inspector’s secretary, an ancient mon¬
ster from the Jurassic swamp, frozen and sly, like some
archaic apparition fixated in the tomb world. Neither
woman spoke to him nor he to them. Opening the inner
door, he nodded to his superior, who was busy on the
phone; seating himself, he got out the specs on Nexus-6,
which he had brought with him, and once more read them
over as Inspector Bryant talked away.

He felt depressed. And yet, logically, because of Dave’s
sudden disappearance from the work scene, he should be
at least guardedly pleased.







4


Maybe I’m worried, Rick Deckard conjectured, that what
happened to Dave will happen to me. An andy smart
enough to laser him could probably take me, too. But that
didn’t seem to be it.

“I see you brought the poop sheet on that new brain
unit,” Inspector Bryant said, hanging up the vidphone.

Rick said, “Yeah, I heard about it on the grapevine. How
many andys are involved and how far did Dave get?”

“Eight to start with,” Bryant said, consulting his clip¬
board. “Dave got the first two.”

“And the remaining six are here in Northern California?”

“As far as we know, Dave thinks so. That was him I was
talking to. I have his notes; they were in his desk. He says
all he knows is here.” Bryant tapped the bundle of note-
paper. So far he did not seem inclined to pass the notes on
to Rick; for some reason he continued to leaf through them
himself, frowning and working his tongue in and around
the fringes of his mouth.


35








36


PHILIP K. DICK


“I have nothing on my agenda,” Rick offered. “I’m ready
to take over in Dave’s place.”

Bryant said thoughtfully, “Dave used the Voigt-Kampff
Altered Scale in testing out the individuals he suspected.
You realize—you ought to, anyhow—that this test isn’t
specific for the new hrain units. No test is; the Voigt scale,
altered three years ago hy Kampff, is all we have.” He
paused, pondering. “Dave considered it accurate. Mayhe it
is. But I would suggest this, before you take out after these
six.” Again he tapped the pile of notes. “Fly to Seattle and
talk with the Rosen people. Have them supply you a repre¬
sentative sampling of types employing the new Nexus-6
unit.”

“And put them through the Voigt-Kampff,” Rick said.

“It sounds so easy,” Bryant said, half to himself.

“Pardon?”

Bryant said, “I think I’ll talk to the Rosen organization
myself, while you’re on your way.” He eyed Rick, then,
silently. Finally he grunted, gnawed on a fingernail, and
eventually decided on what he wanted to say. “I’m going to
discuss with them the possibility of including several hu¬
mans, as well as their new androids. But you won’t know.
It’ll be my decision, in conjunction with the manufactur¬
ers. It should be set up by the time you get there.” He
abruptly pointed at Rick, his face severe. “This is the first
time you’ll be acting as senior bounty hunter. Dave knows
a lot; he’s got years of experience behind him.”

“So have I,” Rick said tensely.

“You’ve handled assignments devolving to you from
Dave’s schedule; he’s always decided exactly which ones
to turn over to you and which not to. But now you’ve got










DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


37


six that he intended to retire himself—one of which man¬
aged to get him first. This one.” Bryant turned the notes
around so that Rick could see. “Max Polokov,” Bryant said.
“That’s what it calls itself, anyhow. Assuming Dave was
right. Everything is based on that assumption, this entire
list. And yet the Voigt-Kampff Altered Scale has only been
administered to the first three, the two Dave retired and
then Polokov. It was while Dave was administering the
test; that’s when Polokov lasered him.”

“Which proves that Dave was right,” Rick said. Other¬
wise he would not have been lasered; Polokov would have
no motive.

“You get started for Seattle,” Bryant said. “Don’t tell
them first; I’ll handle it. Listen.” He rose to his feet,
soberly confronted Rick. “When you run the Voigt-Kampff
scale up there, if one of the humans fails to pass it—”

“That can’t happen,” Rick said.

“One day, a few weeks ago, I talked with Dave about ex¬
actly that. He had been thinking along the same lines. I
had a memo from the Soviet police, W.P.O. itself, circu¬
lated throughout Earth plus the colonies. A group of psy¬
chiatrists in Leningrad have approached W.P.O. wdth the
following proposition. They want the latest and most accu¬
rate personality profile analytical tools used in determin¬
ing the presence of an android—in other words, the
Voigt-Kampff scale—applied to a carefully selected group
of schizoid and schizophrenic human patients. Those,
specifically, which reveal what’s called a ‘flattening of af¬
fect.’ You’ve heard of that.”

Rick said, “That’s specifically what the scale measures.”

“Then you understand what they’re worried about.”












38


PHILIP K. DICK


“This problem has always existed. Since we first en¬
countered androids posing as humans. The consensus of
police opinion is known to you in Lurie Kampffs article,
written eight years ago. Role-taking Blockage in the Unde¬
teriorated Schizophrenic. Kampff compared the dimin¬
ished empathic faculty found in human mental patients
and a superficially similar but basically—”

“The Leningrad psychiatrists,” Bryant broke in brusquely,
“think that a small class of human beings could not pass
the Voigt-Kampff scale. If you tested them in line with po¬
lice work, you’d assess them as humanoid robots. You’d be
wrong, but by then they’d be dead.” He was silent, now,
waiting for Rick’s answer.

“But these individuals,” Rick said, “would all be—”
“They’d be in institutions,” Bryant agreed. “They couldn’t
conceivably function in the outside world; they certainly
couldn’t go undetected as advanced psychotics—unless of
course their breakdown had come recently and suddenly
and no one had gotten around to noticing. But this could
happen. ”

“A million to one odds,” Rick said. But he saw the point.
“What worried Dave,” Bryant continued, “is this ap¬
pearance of the new Nexus-6 advance type. The Rosen or¬
ganization assured us, as you know, that a Nexus-6 could
be delineated by standard profile tests. We took their word
for it. Now we’re forced, as we knew we would be, to de¬
termine it on our own. That’s what you’ll be doing in Seat¬
tle. You understand, don’t you, that this could go wrong
either way. If you can’t pick out all the humanoid robots,
then we have no reliable analytical tool and we’ll never
find the ones who’re already escaping. If your scale factors





DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


39


out a human subject, identifies him as android—” Bryant
beamed at him icily. “It would be awkward, although no
one, absolutely not the Rosen people, will make the news
public. Actually we’ll be able to sit on it indefinitely, al¬
though of course we’ll have to inform W.P.O. and they in
turn will notify Leningrad. Eventually it’ll pop out of the
’papes at us. But by then we may have developed a better
scale.” He picked the phone up. “You want to get started?
Use a department car and fuel yourself at our pumps.”

Standing, Rick said, “Can I take Dave Holden’s notes
with me? I want to read them along the way.”

Bryant said, “Let’s wait until you’ve tried out your scale
in Seattle.” His tone was interestingly merciless, and Rick
Deckard noted it.

When he landed the police department hovercar on the
roof of the Rosen Association Building in Seattle, he found
a young woman waiting for him. Black-haired and slen¬
der, wearing the new huge dust-filtering glasses, she ap¬
proached his car, her hands deep in the pockets of her
brightly striped long coat. She had, on her sharply defined
small face, an expression of sullen distaste.

“What’s the matter?” Rick said as he stepped from the
parked car.

The girl said, obliquely, “Oh, I don’t know. Something
about the way we got talked to on the phone. It doesn’t
matter.” Abruptly she held out her hand; he reflexively
took it. “I’m Rachael Rosen. I guess you’re Mr. Deckard.”

“This is not my idea,” he said.

“Yes, Inspector Bryant told us that. But you’re officially
the San Francisco Police Department, and it doesn’t be-










40


PHILIP K. DICK


lieve our unit is to the public benefit.” She eyed him from
beneath long black lashes, probably artificial.

Rick said, “A humanoid robot is like any other machine;
it can fluctuate between being a benefit and a hazard very
rapidly. As a benefit it’s not our problem.”

“But as a hazard,” Rachael Rosen said, “then you come
in. Is it true, Mr. Deckard, that you’re a bounty hunter?”

He shrugged, with reluctance, nodded.

“You have no difficulty viewing an android as inert,” the
girl said. “So you can ‘retire’ it, as they say.”

“Do you have the group selected out for me?” he said.
“I’d like to—” He broke off. Because, all at once, he had
seen their animals.

A powerful corporation, he realized, would of course be
able to afford this. In the back of his mind, evidently, he
had anticipated such a collection; it was not surprise that
he felt but more a sort of yearning. He quietly walked
away from the girl, toward the closest pen. Already he
could smell them, the several scents of the creatures
standing or sitting, or, in the case of what appeared to be a
raccoon, asleep.

Never in his life had he personally seen a raccoon. He
knew the animal only from 3-D films shown on television.
For some reason the dust had struck that species almost
as hard as it had the birds—of which almost none survived
now. In an automatic response he brought out his much-
thumbed Sidney’s and looked up raccoon with all the sub¬
listings. The list prices, naturally, appeared in italics; like
Percheron horses, none existed on the market for sale at
any figure. Sidney’s catalogue simply listed the price at






DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


41


which the last transaction involving a raccoon had taken
place. It was astronomical.

“His name is Bill,” the girl said from behind him. “Bill
the raccoon. We acquired him just last year from a sub¬
sidiary corporation.” She pointed past him and he then
perceived the armed company guards, standing with their
machine guns, the rapid-fire little light Skoda issue; the
eyes of the guards had been fastened on him since his car
landed. And, he thought, my car is clearly marked as a po¬
lice vehicle.

“A major manufacturer of androids,” he said thought¬
fully, “invests its surplus capital on living animals.”

“Look at the owl,” Rachael Rosen said. “Here, Fll wake
it up for you.” She started toward a small, distant cage, in
the center of which jutted up a branching dead tree.

There are no owls, he started to say. Or so we’ve been
told. Sidney’s, he thought; they list it in their catalogue as
extinct: the tiny, precise type, the E, again and again
throughout the catalogue. As the girl walked ahead of him
he checked to see, and he was right. Sidney’s never makes
a mistake, he said to himself. We know that, too. What else
can we depend on?

“It’s artificial,” he said, with sudden realization; his dis¬
appointment welled up keen and intense.

“No.” She smiled, and he saw that she had small even
teeth, as white as her eyes and hair were black.

“But Sidney’s listing,” he said, trying to show her the
catalogue. To prove it to her.

The girl said, “We don’t buy from Sidney’s or from any
animal dealer. All our purchases are from private parties.





42


PHILIP K. DICK


and the prices we pay aren’t reported.” She added, “Also
we have our own naturalists; they’re now working up in
Canada. There’s still a good deal of forest left, compara¬
tively speaking, anyhow. Enough for small animals and
once in a while a bird.”

For a long time he stood gazing at the owl, who dozed
on its perch. A thousand thoughts came into his mind,
thoughts about the war, about the days when owls had
fallen from the sky; he remembered how in his childhood
it had been discovered that species upon species had be¬
come extinct and how the ’papes had reported it each
day—foxes one morning, badgers the next, until people
had stopped reading the perpetual animal obits.

He thought, too, about his need for a real animal; within
him an actual hatred once more manifested itself toward
his electric sheep, which he had to tend, had to care
about, as if it lived. The tyranny of an object, he thought. It
doesn’t know 1 exist. Like the androids, it had no ability to
appreciate the existence of another. He had never thought
of this before, the similarity between an electric animal
and an andy. The electric animal, he pondered, could be
considered a subform of the other, a kind of vastly inferior
robot. Or, conversely, the android could be regarded as a
highly developed, evolved version of the ersatz animal.
Both viewpoints repelled him.

“If you sold your owl,” he said to the girl Rachael Rosen,
“how much would you want for it, and how much of that
down?”

“We would never sell our owl.” She scrutinized him
with a mixture of pleasure and pity; or so he read her ex-




DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


43


pression. “And even if we sold it, you couldn’t possibly pay
the price. What kind of animal do you have at home?”

“A sheep,” he said. “A black-faced Suffolk ewe.”

“Well, then you should be happy.”

“I’m happy,” he answered. “It’s just that I always
wanted an owl, even back before they all dropped dead.”
He corrected himself. “All but yours.”

Rachael said, “Our present crash program and overall
planning call for us to obtain an additional owl which can
mate with Scrappy.” She indicated the owl dozing on its
perch; it had briefly opened both eyes, yellow slits which
healed over as the owl settled back down to resume its
slumber. Its chest rose conspicuously and fell, as if the
owl, in its hypnagogic state, had sighed.

Breaking away from the sight—it made absolute bitter¬
ness blend throughout his prior reaction of awe and
yearning—he said, “I’d like to test out the selection, now.
Can we go downstairs?”

“My uncle took the call from your superior and by now
he probably has—”

“You’re a family?” Rick broke in. “A corporation this
large is a family affair?”

Continuing her sentence, Rachael said, “Uncle Eldon
should have an android group and a control group set up
by now. So let’s go.” She strode toward the elevator, hands
again thrust violently in the pockets of her coat; she did
not look back, and he hesitated for a moment, feeling an¬
noyance, before he at last trailed after her.

“What have you got against me?” he asked her as to¬
gether they descended.











44


PHILIP K. DICK


She reflected, as if up to now she hadn’t known. “Well,”
she said, “you, a little police department employee, are in
a unique position. Know what 1 mean?” She gave him a
malice-filled sidelong glance.

“How much of your current output,” he asked, “consists
of types equipped with the Nexus-6?”

“All,” Rachael said.

“I’m sure the Voigt-Kampff scale will work with them.”

“And if it doesn’t, we’ll have to withdraw all Nexus-6
types from the market.” Her black eyes flamed up; she
glowered at him as the elevator ceased descending and its
doors slid back. “Because you police departments can’t do
an adequate job in the simple matter of detecting the mi¬
nuscule number of Nexus-6s who balk—”

A man, dapper and lean and elderly, approached them,
hand extended; on his face a harried expression showed, as
if everything recently had begun happening too fast. “I’m
Eldon Rosen,” he explained to Rick as they shook hands.
“Listen, Deckard; you realize we don’t manufacture any¬
thing here on Earth, right? We can’t just phone down to
production and ask for a diverse flock of items; it’s not that
we don’t want or intend to cooperate with you. Anyhow I’ve
done the best 1 can.” His left hand, shakily, roved through
his thinning hair.

Indicating his department briefcase, Rick said, “I’m
ready to start.” The senior Rosen’s nervousness buoyed up
his own confidence. They’re afraid of me, he realized with
a start. Rachael Rosen included. 1 can probably force them
to abandon manufacture of their Nexus-6 types; what 1 do
during the next hour will affect the structure of their oper¬
ation. It could conceivably determine the future of the









DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


45


Rosen Association, here in the United States, in Russia,
and on Mars.

The two members of the Rosen family studied him ap¬
prehensively and he felt the hollowness of their manner;
by coming here he had brought the void to them, had ush¬
ered in emptiness and the hush of economic death. They
control inordinate power, he thought. This enterprise is
considered one of the system’s industrial pivots; the manu¬
facture of androids, in fact, has become so linked to the
colonization effort that if one dropped into ruin, so would
the other in time. The Rosen Association, naturally, under¬
stood this perfectly. Eldon Rosen had obviously been con¬
scious of it since Harry Bryant’s call.

“I wouldn’t worry if 1 were you,” Rick said as the two
Rosens led him down a highly illuminated wide corridor.
He himself felt quietly content. This moment, more than
any other which he could remember, pleased him. Well,
they would all soon know what his testing apparatus could
accomplish—and could not. “If you have no confidence in
the Voigt-Kampff scale,” he pointed out, “possibly your or¬
ganization should have researched an alternate test. It can
be argued that the responsibility rests partly on you. Oh,
thanks.” The Rosens had steered him from the corridor
and into a chic, living-roomish cubicle furnished with car¬
peting, lamps, couch, and modern little end tables on
which rested recent magazines . . . including, he noticed,
the February supplement to the Sidney's catalogue, which
he personally had not seen. In fact, the February supple¬
ment wouldn’t be out for another three days. Obviously the
Rosen Association had a special relationship with Sidney’s.

Annoyed, he picked up the supplement. “This is a viola-











46


PHILIP K. DICK


tion of public trust. Nobody should get advance news of
price changes.” As a matter of fact this might violate a fed¬
eral statute; he tried to remember the relevant law, found
he could not. “I’m taking this with me,” he said, and, open¬
ing his briefcase, dropped the supplement within.

After an interval of silence, Eldon Rosen said wearily,
“Look, officer, it hasn’t been our policy to solicit advance—”

“I’m not a peace officer,” Rick said. “I’m a bounty
hunter.” From his opened briefcase he fished out the
Voigt-Kampff apparatus, seated himself at a nearby rose¬
wood coffee table, and began to assemble the rather sim¬
ple polygraphic instruments. “You may send the first
testee in,” he informed Eldon Rosen, who now looked
more haggard than ever.

“I’d like to watch,” Rachael said, also seating herself.
“I’ve never seen an empathy test being administered.
What do those things you have there measure?”

Rick said, “This”—he held up the flat adhesive disk
with its trailing wires—“measures capillary dilation in the
facial area. We know this to be a primary autonomic
response, the so-called ‘shame’ or ‘blushing’ reaction to a
morally shocking stimulus. It can’t be controlled voluntarily,
as can skin conductivity, respiration, and cardiac rate.” He
showed her the other instrument, a pencil-beam light.
“This records fluctuations of tension within the eye mus¬
cles. Simultaneous with the blush phenomenon there gen¬
erally can be found a small but detectable movement of—”

“And these can’t be found in androids,” Rachael said.

“They’re not engendered by the stimuli-questions; no.
Although biologically they exist. Potentially.”

Rachael said, “Give me the test.”








DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


47


“Why?” Rick said, puzzled.

Speaking up, Eldon Rosen said hoarsely, “We selected
her as your first subject. She may be an android. We’re
hoping you can tell.” He seated himself in a series of
clumsy motions, got out a cigarette, lit it, and fixedly
watched.










The small beam of white light shone steadily into the left
eye of Rachael Rosen, and against her cheek the wire-
mesh disk adhered. She seemed calm.

Seated where he could catch the readings on the two
gauges of the Voigt-Kampff testing apparatus, Rick Deck-
ard said, “I’m going to outline a number of social situa¬
tions. You are to express your reaction to each as quickly
as possible. You will be timed, of course.”

“And of course,” Rachael said distantly, “my verbal re¬
sponses won’t count. It’s solely the eye-muscle and capil¬
lary reaction that you’ll use as indices. But I’ll answer; I
want to go through this and—” She broke off. “Go ahead,
Mr. Deckard.”

Rick, selecting question three, said, “You are given a
calf-skin wallet on your birthday.” Both gauges immedi¬
ately registered past the green and onto the red; the nee¬
dles swung violently and then subsided.

“I wouldn’t accept it,” Rachael said. “Also I’d report the
person who gave it to me to the police.”


48



DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


49


After making a jot of notation, Rick continued, turning
to the eighth question of the Voigt-Kampff profile scale.
“You have a little hoy and he shows you his butterfly col¬
lection, including his killing jar.”

“I’d take him to the doctor.” Rachael’s voice was low
but firm. Again the twin gauges registered, but this time
not so far. He made a note of that, too.

“You’re sitting watching TV,” he continued, “and sud¬
denly you discover a wasp crawling on your wrist.”

Rachael said, “I’d kill it.” The gauges, this time, regis¬
tered almost nothing: only a feeble and momentary tremor.
He noted that and hunted cautiously for the next question.

“In a magazine you come across a full-page color pic¬
ture of a nude girl.” He paused.

“Is this testing whether I’m an android,” Rachael asked
tartly, “or whether I’m homosexual?” The gauges did not
register.

He continued, “Your husband likes the picture.” Still the
gauges failed to indicate a reaction. “The girl,” he added,
“is lying facedown on a large and beautiful bearskin rug.”
The gauges remained inert, and he said to himself. An an¬
droid response. Failing to detect the major element, the
dead animal pelt. Her—Its—mind is concentrating on
other factors. “Your husband hangs the picture up on the
wall of his study,” he finished, and this time the needles
moved.

“I certainly wouldn’t let him,” Rachael said.

“Okay,” he said, nodding. “Now consider this. You’re
reading a novel written in the old days before the war. The
characters are visiting Fisherman’s Wharf in San Fran¬
cisco. They become hungry and enter a seafood restau-








50


PHILIP K. DICK


rant. One of them orders lobster, and the chef drops the
lobster into the tub of boiling water while the characters
watch.”

“Oh god,” Rachael said. “That’s awful! Did they really
do that? It’s depraved! You mean a live lobster?” The
gauges, however, did not respond. Formally, a correct re¬
sponse. But simulated.

“You rent a mountain cabin,” he said, “in an area still
verdant. It’s rustic knotty pine with a huge fireplace.”

“Yes,” Rachael said, nodding impatiently.

“On the walls someone has hung old maps, Currier and
Ives prints, and above the fireplace a deer’s head has been
mounted, a full stag with developed horns. The people with
you admire the decor of the cabin and you all decide—”

“Not with the deer head,” Rachael said. The gauges,
however, showed an amplitude within the green only.

“You become pregnant,” Rick continued, “by a man who
has promised to marry you. The man goes off with another
woman, your best friend; you get an abortion and—”

“I would never get an abortion,” Rachael said. “Any¬
how you can’t. It’s a life sentence and the police are al¬
ways watching.” This time both needles swung violently
into the red.

“How do you know that?” Rick asked her, curiously.
“About the difficulty of obtaining an abortion?”

“Everybody knows that,” Rachael answered.

“It sounded like you spoke from personal experience.”
He watched the needles intently; they still swept out a
wide path across the dials. “One more. You’re dating a
man and he asks you to visit his apartment. While you’re
there he offers you a drink. As you stand holding your




DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


51


glass you see into the bedroom; it’s attractively decorated
wdth bullfight posters, and you wander in to look closer.
He follows after you, closing the door. Putting his arm
around you, he says—”

Rachael interrupted, “What’s a bullfight poster?”

“Drawings, usually in color and very large, showing a
matador with his cape, a bull trying to gore him.” He was
puzzled. “How old are you?” he asked; that might be a
factor.

“I’m eighteen,” Rachael said. “Okay; so this man closes
the door and puts his arm around me. What does he say?”

Rick said, “Do you know how bullfights ended?”

“I suppose somebody got hurt.”

“The bull, at the end, was always killed.” He waited,
watching the two needles. They palpitated restlessly, noth¬
ing more. No real reading at all. “A final question,” he
said. “Two-part. You are watching an old movie on TV, a
movie from before the war. It shows a banquet in
progress; the guests are enjoying raw oysters.”

“Ugh,” Rachael said; the needles swung swiftly.

“The entree,” he continued, “consists of boiled dog,
stuffed vsdth rice.” The needles moved less this time, less
than they had for the raw oysters. “Are raw oysters more
acceptable to you than a dish of boiled dog? Evidently
not.” He put his pencil down, shut off the beam of light, re¬
moved the adhesive patch from her cheek. “You’re an an¬
droid,” he said. “That’s the conclusion of the testing,” he
informed her—or rather it—and Eldon Rosen, who re¬
garded him with writhing worry; the elderly man’s face
contorted, shifted plastically with angry concern. “I’m right,
aren’t I?” Rick said. There was no answer, from either of













52


PHILIP K. DICK


the Rosens. “Look,” he said reasonably. “We have no con¬
flict of interest; it’s important to me that the Voigt-Kampff
test functions, almost as important as it is to you.”

The elder Rosen said, “She’s not an android.”

“1 don’t believe it,” Rick said.

“Why would he lie?” Rachael said to Rick fiercely. “If
anything, we’d lie the other way.”

“1 want a bone marrow analysis made of you,” Rick
said to her. “It can eventually be organically determined
whether you’re android or not; it’s slow and painful, ad¬
mittedly, but—”

“Legally,” Rachael said, “1 can’t be forced to undergo a
bone marrow test. That’s been established in the courts;
self-incrimination. And anyhow on a live person—not the
corpse of a retired android—it takes a long time. You can
give that damn Voigt-Kampff profile test because of the
specials; they have to be tested for constantly, and while
the government was doing that you police agencies slipped
the Voigt-Kampff through. But what you said is true;
that’s the end of the testing.” She rose to her feet, paced
away from him, and stood with her hands on her hips, her
back to him.

“The issue is not the legality of the bone marrow analy¬
sis,” Eldon Rosen said huskily. “The issue is that your em¬
pathy delineation test failed in response to my niece. 1 can
explain why she scored as an android might. Rachael grew
up aboard Salander 3. She was born on it; she spent four¬
teen of her eighteen years living off its tape library and
what the nine other crew members, all adults, knew about
Earth. Then, as you know, the ship turned back a sixth of






DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


53


the way to Proxima. Otherwise Rachael would never have
seen Earth—anyhow not until her later life.”

“You would have retired me,” Rachael said over her
shoulder. “In a police dragnet 1 would have been killed.
I’ve known that since I got here four years ago; this isn’t
the first time the Voigt-Kampff test has been given to me.
In fact I rarely leave this building; the risk is enormous,
because of those roadblocks you police set up, those flying
wedge spot checks to pick up unclassified specials.”

“And androids,” Eldon Rosen added, “Although natu¬
rally the public isn’t told that; they’re not supposed to
know that androids are on Earth, in our midst.”

“I don’t think they are,” Rick said. “I think the various
police agencies here and in the Soviet Union have gotten
them all. The population is small enough now; everyone,
sooner or later, runs into a random checkpoint.” That,
anyhow, was the idea.

“What were your instructions,” Eldon Rosen asked, “if
you wound up designating a human as android?”

“That’s a departmental matter.” He began restoring his
testing gear to his briefcase; the two Rosens watched
silently. “Obviously,” he added, “I was told to cancel fur¬
ther testing, as I’m now doing. If it failed once there’s no
point in going on.” He snapped the briefcase shut.

“We could have defrauded you,” Rachael said. “Nothing
forced us to admit you mistested me. And the same for the
other nine subjects we’ve selected.” She gestured vigor¬
ously. “All we had to do was simply go along with your test
results, either way.”

Rick said, “1 would have insisted* on a list in advance. A















54


PHILIP K. DICK


sealed-envelope breakdown. And compared my own test
results for congruity. There would have had to be con-
gruity.” And 1 can see now, he realized, that I wouldn’t
have gotten it. Bryant was right. Thank god I didn’t go out |
bounty hunting on the basis of this test.

“Yes, I suppose you would have done that,” Eldon Rosen
said. He glanced at Rachael, who nodded. “We discussed j
that possibility,” Eldon said then, with reluctance. j

“This problem,” Rick said, “stems entirely from your
method of operation, Mr. Rosen. Nobody forced your orga¬
nization to evolve the production of humanoid robots to a
point where—”

“We produced what the colonists wanted,” Eldon Rosen
said. “We followed the time-honored principle underlying
every commercial venture. If our firm hadn’t made these
progressively more human types, other firms in the field
would have. We knew the risk we were taking when we
developed the Nexus-6 brain unit. But your Voigt-Kampff
test was a failure before we released that type of android.

If you had failed to classify a Nexus-6 android as an an¬
droid, if you had checked it out as human—but that’s not
what happened.” His voice had become hard and bitingly
penetrating. “Your police department—others as well—
may have retired, very probably have retired, authentic
humans with underdeveloped empathic ability, such as my
innocent niece here. Your position, Mr. Deckard, is ex¬
tremely bad morally. Ours isn’t.”

“In other words,” Rick said with acuity, “I’m not going
to be given a chance to check out a single Nexus-6. You
people dropped this schizoid girl on me beforehand.” And






DO ANDROIPS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


55


my test, he realized, is wiped out. I shouldn’t have gone for
it, he said to himself. However, it’s too late now.

“We have you, Mr. Deckard,” Rachael Rosen agreed in a
quiet, reasonable voice; she turned toward him then and
smiled.

He could not make out, even now, how the Rosen Associa¬
tion had managed to snare him, and so easily. Experts, he
realized. A mammoth corporation like this—it embodies
too much experience. It possesses in fact a sort of group
mind. And Eldon and Rachael Rosen consisted as spokes¬
men for that corporate entity. His mistake, evidently, had
been in viewing them as individuals. It was a mistake he
would not make again.

“Your superior, Mr. Bryant,” Eldon Rosen said, “will
have difficulty understanding how you happened to let us
void your testing apparatus before the test began.” He
pointed toward the ceiling, and Rick saw the camera lens.
His massive error in dealing with the Rosens had been
recorded. “I think the right thing for us all to do,” Eldon
said, “is sit down and—” He gestured affably. “We can
work something out, Mr. Deckard. There’s no need for
anxiety. The Nexus-6 variety of android is a fact; we here
at the Rosen Association recognize it and I think now you
do, too.”

Rachael, leaning toward Rick, said, “How would you
like to ovm an owl?”

“I doubt if I’ll ever own an owl.” But he knew what she
meant; he understood the business the Rosen Association
wanted to transact. Tension of a kind he had never felt be-









56


PHILIP K. DICK


fore manifested itself inside him; it exploded, leisurely, in
every part of his body. He felt the tension, the conscious¬
ness of what was happening, take over completely.

“But an owl,” Eldon Rosen said, “is the thing you want.”
He glanced at his niece inquiringly. “1 don’t think he has
any idea—”

“Of course he does,” Rachael contradicted. “He knows
exactly where this is heading. Don’t you, Mr. Deckard?”
Again she leaned toward him, and this time closer; he
could smell a mild perfume about her, almost a warmth.
“You’re practically there, Mr. Deckard. You practically
have your owl.” To Eldon Rosen she said, “He’s a bounty
hunter; remember? So he lives off the bounty he makes,
not his salary. Isn’t that so, Mr. Deckard?”

He nodded.

“How many androids escaped this time?” Rachael
inquired.

Presently he said, “Eight. Originally. Two have already
been retired, by someone else; not me.”

“You get how much for each android?” Rachael asked.

Shrugging, he said, “It varies.”

Rachael said, “If you have no test you can administer,
then there is no way you can identify an android. And if
there’s no way you can identify an android there’s no way
you can collect your bounty. So if the Voigt-Kampff scale
has to be abandoned—”

“A new scale,” Rick said, “will replace it. This has hap¬
pened before.” Three times, to be exact. But the new
scale, the more modern analytical device, had been there
already; no lag had existed. This time was different.

“Eventually, of course, the Voigt-Kampff scale will be-









DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


57


come obsolete,” Rachael agreed. “But not now. We’re sat¬
isfied ourselves that it will delineate the Nexus-6 types and
we’d like you to proceed on that basis in your own particu¬
lar, peculiar work.” Rocking back and forth, her arms
tightly folded, she regarded him with intensity. Trying to
fathom his reaction.

“Tell him he can have his owl,” Eldon Rosen grated.

“You can have the owl,” Rachael said, still eyeing him.
“The one up on the roof. Scrappy. But we will want to
mate it if we can get our hands on a male. And any off¬
spring will be ours; that has to be absolutely understood.”

Rick said, “I’ll divide the brood.”

“No,” Rachael said instantly; behind her Eldon Rosen
shook his head, hacking her up. “That way you’d have
claim to the sole bloodline of owls for the rest of eternity.
And there’s another condition. You can’t will your owl to
anybody; at your death it reverts back to the association.”

“That sounds,” Rick said, “like an invitation for you to
come in and kill me. To get your owl back immediately. 1
won’t agree to that; it’s too dangerous.”

“You’re a bounty hunter,” Rachael said. “You can han¬
dle a laser gun—in fact you’re carrying one right now. If
you can’t protect yourself, how are you going to retire the
six remaining Nexus-6 andys? They’re a good deal
smarter than the Grozzi Corporation’s old W-4.”

“But 1 hunt them,'’ he said. “This way, with a reversion
clause on the owl, someone would be hunting me.” And he
did not like the idea of being stalked; he had seen the ef¬
fect on androids. It brought about certain notable changes,
even in them.

Rachael said, “All right; we’ll yield on that. You can will













58


PHILIP K. DICK


the owl to your heirs. But we insist on getting the complete
brood. If you can’t agree to that, go on back to San Fran¬
cisco and admit to your superiors in the department that
the Voigt-Kampff scale, at least as administered by you,
can’t distinguish an andy from a human being. And then
look for another job.”

“Give me some time,” Rick said.

“Okay,” Rachael said. “We’ll leave you in here, where
it’s comfortable.” She examined her wristwatch.

“Half an hour,” Eldon Rosen said. He and Rachael filed
toward the door of the room, silently. They had said what
they intended to say, he realized; the rest lay in his lap.

As Rachael started to close the door after herself and
her uncle, Rick said starkly, “You managed to set me up
perfectly. You have it on tape that 1 missed on you; you
know that my job depends on the use of the Voigt-Kampff
scale; and you own that goddamn owl.”

“Your owl, dear,” Rachael said. “Remember? We’ll tie
your home address around its leg and have it fly down to
San Francisco; it’ll meet you there when you get off work.”

It, he thought. She keeps calling the owl it. Not her.
“Just a second,” he said.

Pausing at the door, Rachael said, “You’ve decided?”

“I want,” he said, opening his briefcase, “to ask you one
more question from the Voigt-Kampff scale. Sit down
again.”

Rachael glanced at her uncle; he nodded and she
grudgingly returned, seating herself as before. “What’s
this for?” she demanded, her eyebrows lifted in distaste—
and wariness. He perceived her skeletal tension, noted it
professionally.









DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


59


Presently he had the pencil of light trained on her right
eye and the adhesive patch again in contact with her
cheek. Rachael stared into the light rigidly, the expression
of extreme distaste still manifest.

“My briefcase,” Rick said as he rummaged for the Voigt-
Kampff forms. “Nice, isn’t it? Department issue.”

“Well, well,” Rachael said remotely.

“Bahyhide,” Rick said. He stroked the hlack leather
surface of the briefcase. “One hundred percent genuine
human bahyhide.” He saw the two dial indicators gyrate
frantically. But only after a pause. The reaction had
come, but too late. He knew the reaction period down to a
fraction of a second, the correct reaction period; there
should have been none. “Thanks, Miss Rosen,” he said,
and gathered together the equipment again; he had con¬
cluded his retesting. “That’s all.”

“You’re leaving?” Rachael asked.

“Yes,” he said. “I’m satisfied.”

Cautiously, Rachael said, “What about the other nine
subjects?”

“The scale has been adequate in your case,” he an¬
swered. “I can extrapolate from that; it’s clearly still effec¬
tive.” To Eldon Rosen, who slumped morosely by the door
of the room, he said, “Does she know?” Sometimes they
didn’t; false memories had been tried various times, gen¬
erally in the mistaken idea that through them, reactions to
testing would be altered.

Eldon Rosen said, “No. We programmed her completely.
But I think toward the end she suspected.” To the girl he
said, “You guessed when he asked for one more try.”

Pale, Rachael nodded fixedly.









60


PHILIP K. DICK


“Don’t be afraid of him,” Eldon Rosen told her. “You’re
not an escaped android on Earth illegally; you’re the prop¬
erty of the Rosen Association, used as a sales device for
prospective emigrants.” He walked to the girl, put his hand
comfortingly on her shoulder; at the touch the girl flinched.

“He’s right,” Rick said. “I’m not going to retire you. Miss
Rosen. Good day.” He started toward the door, then halted
briefly. To the two of them he said, “Is the owl genuine?”

Rachael glanced swiftly at the elder Rosen.

“He’s leaving anyhow,” Eldon Rosen said. “It doesn’t
matter; the owl is artificial. There are no owls.”

“Hmm,” Rick muttered, and stepped numbly out into
the corridor. The two of them watched him go. Neither
said anything. Nothing remained to say. So that’s how the
largest manufacturer of androids operates, Rick said to
himself. Devious, and in a manner he had never encoun¬
tered before. A weird and convoluted new personality
type; no wonder law enforcement agencies were having
trouble with the Nexus-6.

The Nexus-6. He had now come up against it. Rachael,
he realized; she must he a Nexus-6. I’m seeing one of them
for the first time. And they damn near did it; they came
awfully damn close to undermining the Voigt-Kampff
scale, the only method we have for detecting them. The
Rosen Association does a good job—makes a good try,
anyhow—at protecting its products.

And I have to face six more of them, he reflected. Before
I’m finished.

He would earn the bounty money. Every cent.

Assuming he made it through alive.










The TV set boomed; descending the great empty apartment
building’s dust-stricken stairs to the level below, John
Isidore made out now the familiar voice of Buster Friendly,
burbling happily to his system-wide vast audience.

“—ho ho, folks! Zip click zip! Time for a brief note on to¬
morrow’s weather; first the Eastern seaboard of the U.S.A.
Mongoose satellite reports that fallout will be especially
pronounced toward noon and then will taper off. So all you
dear folks who’ll be venturing out ought to wait until after¬
noon, eh? And speaking of waiting, it’s now only ten hours
’til that big piece of news, my special expose! Tell your
friends to watch! I’m revealing something that’ll amaze
you. Now, you might guess that it’s just the usual—”

As Isidore knocked on the apartment door, the televi¬
sion died immediately into nonbeing. It had not merely be¬
come silent; it had stopped existing, scared into its grave
by his knock.

He sensed, behind the closed door, the presence of life,
beyond that of the TV. His straining faculties manufac-


61

















62


PHILIP K . DICK


tured or else picked up a haunted, tongueless fear, by
someone retreating from him, someone blown back to the
farthest wall of the apartment in an attempt to evade him.

“Hey,” he called. “1 live upstairs. I heard your TV. Let’s
meet; okay?” He waited, listening. No sound and no mo¬
tion; his words had not pried the person loose. “I brought
you a cube of margarine,” he said, standing close to the
door in an effort to speak through its thickness. “My
name’s J. R. Isidore and 1 work for the well-known animal
vet Mr. Hannibal Sloat; you’ve heard of him. I’m rep¬
utable; 1 have a job. 1 drive Mr. Sloat’s truck.”

The door, meagerly, opened and he saw within the
apartment a fragmented and misaligned shrinking figure,
a girl who cringed and slunk away and yet held onto the
door, as if for physical support. Fear made her seem ill; it
distorted her body lines, made her appear as if someone
had broken her and then, with malice, patched her to¬
gether badly. Her eyes, enormous, glazed over fixedly as
she attempted to smile.

He said, with sudden understanding, “You thought no
one lived in this building. You thought it was abandoned.”

Nodding, the girl whispered, “Yes.”

“But,” Isidore said, “it’s good to have neighbors. Heck,
until you came along 1 didn’t have any.” And that was no
fun, god knew.

“You’re the only one?” the girl asked. “In this building
besides me?” She seemed less timid now; her body
straightened and with her hand she smoothed her dark
hair. Now he saw that she had a nice figure, although
small, and nice eyes markedly established by long black










DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


63


lashes. Caught by surprise, the girl wore pajama bottoms
and nothing more. And as he looked past her he perceived
a room in disorder. Suitcases lay here and there, opened,
their contents half spilled onto the littered floor. But this
was natural; she had barely arrived.

“I’m the only one besides you,” Isidore said. “And 1
won’t bother you.” He felt glum; his offering, possessing
the quality of an authentic old pre-war ritual, had not
been accepted. In fact the girl did not even seem aware of
it. Or maybe she did not understand what a cube of mar¬
garine was for. He had that intuition; the girl seemed more
bewildered than anything else. Out of her depth and help¬
lessly floating in now-receding circles of fear. “Good old

Buster,” he said, trying to reduce her rigid postural

\

stance. “You like him? I watch him every morning and
then again at night when I get home; I watch him while
I’m eating dinner and then his late late show until I go to
bed. At least until my TV set broke.”

“Who—” the girl began and then broke off; she bit her
lip as if savagely angry. Evidently at herself.

“Buster Friendly,” he explained. It seemed odd to him
that this girl had never heard of Earth’s most knee¬
slapping TV comic. “Where did you come here from?” he
asked curiously.

“I don’t see that it matters.” She shot a swift glance up¬
ward at him. Something that she saw seemed to ease her
concern; her body noticeably relaxed. “I’ll be glad to re¬
ceive company,” she said, “later on when I’m more moved
in. Right now, of course, it’s out of the question.”

“Why out of the question?” He was puzzled; everything.

/













64


PHILIP K. DICK


about her puzzled him. Maybe, he thought, I’ve been hving
here alone too long. I’ve become strange. They say chicken-
heads are like that. The thought made him feel even more
glum. “I could help you unpack,” he ventured; the door,
now, had virtually shut in his face. “And your furniture.”

The girl said, “I have no furniture. All these things”—
she indicated the room behind her—“they were here.”

“They won’t do,” Isidore said. He could tell that at a
glance. The chairs, the carpet, the tables—all had rotted
away; they sagged in mutual ruin, victims of the despotic
force of time. And of abandonment. No one had lived in
this apartment for years; the ruin had become almost
complete. He couldn’t imagine how she figured on living in
such surroundings. “Listen,” he said earnestly. “If we go
all over the building looking, we can probably find you
things that aren’t so tattered. A lamp from one apartment,
a table from another.”

“I’ll do it,” the girl said. “Myself, thanks.”

“You’d go into those apartments alone?'' He could not
believe it.

“Why not?” Again she shuddered nervously, grimacing
in awareness of saying something wrong.

Isidore said, “I’ve tried it. Once. After that I just come
home and go in my ovm place and I don’t think about the
rest. The apartments in which no one lives—hundreds of
them and all full of the possessions people had, like family
photographs and clothes. Those that died couldn’t take any¬
thing and those who emigrated didn’t want to. This build¬
ing, except for my apartment, is completely kipple-ized.”

“ ‘Kipple-ized’?” She did not comprehend.







DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


65


“Kipple is useless objects, Kke junk mail or match folders
after you use the last match or gum wrappers or yesterday’s
homeopape. When nobody’s around, kipple reproduces it¬
self. For instance, if you go to bed leaving any kipple around
your apartment, when you wake up the next morning
there’s tv^ce as much of it. It always gets more and more.”

“1 see.” The girl regarded him uncertainly, not knowing
whether to believe him. Not sure if he meant it seriously.

“There’s the First Law of Kipple,” he said. “ ‘Kipple drives
out nonkipple.’ Like Gresham’s law about bad money. And
in these apartments there’s been nobody there to fight the
kipple.”

“So it has taken over completely,” the girl finished. She
nodded. “Now 1 understand.”

“Your place, here,” he said, “this apartment you’ve
picked“it’s too kipple-ized to live in. We can roll the
kipple-factor back; we can do like 1 said, raid the other
apts. But—” He broke off.

“But what?”

Isidore said, “We can’t vsdn.”

“Why not?” The girl stepped into the hall, closing the
door behind her; arms folded self-consciously before her
small high breasts, she faced him, eager to understand. Or
so it appeared to him, anyhow. She was at least listening.

“No one can win against kipple,” he said, “except tem¬
porarily and maybe in one spot, like in my apartment I’ve
sort of created a stasis between the pressure of kipple and
nonkipple, for the time being. But eventually I’ll die or go
away, and then the kipple will again take over. It’s a uni¬
versal principle operating throughout the universe; the







66


PHILIP K. DICK


entire universe is moving toward a final state of total, ab¬
solute kippleization.” He added, “Except of course for the
upward climb of Wilbur Mercer.” I

The girl eyed him. “1 don’t see any relation.”

“That’s what Mercerism is all about.” Again he found
himself puzzled. “Don’t you participate in fusion? Don’t
you own an empathy box?” j

After a pause the girl said carefully, “1 didn’t bring mine j
with me. 1 assumed I’d find one here.”

“But an empathy box,” he said, stammering in his ex¬
citement, “is the most personal possession you have! It’s an i
extension of your body; it’s the way you touch other hu¬
mans, it’s the way you stop being alone. But you know that.
Everybody knows that. Mercer even lets people like me—”

He broke off. But too late; he had already told her, and he
could see by her face, by the flicker of sudden aversion,
that she knew. “1 almost passed the IQ test,” he said in a
low, shaky voice. “I’m not very special, only moderately;
not like some you see. But that’s what Mercer doesn’t care |
about.” j

“As far as I’m concerned,” the girl said, “you can count
that as a major objection to Mercerism.” Her voice was

I

clean and neutral; she intended only to state a fact, he re- j

I

alized. The fact of her attitude toward chickenheads. |

j

“1 guess I’ll go back upstairs,” he said, and started away j
from her, his cube of margarine clutched; it had become i

plastic and damp from the squeeze of his hand. i

i

The girl watched him go, still with the neutral expres- !
sion on her face. And then she called, “Wait.” j

Turning, he said, “Why?” i








DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


67


“I’ll need you. For getting myself adequate furniture.
From other apartments, as you said.” She strolled toward
him, her bare upper body sleek and trim, without an ex¬
cess gram of fat. “What time do you get home from work?
You can help me then.”

Isidore said, “Could you maybe fix dinner for us? If I
brought home the ingredients?”

“No, I have too much to do.” The girl shook off the re¬
quest effortlessly, and he noticed that, perceived it without
understanding it. Now that her initial fear had diminished,
something else had begun to emerge from her. Something
more strange. And, he thought, deplorable. A coldness.
Like, he thought, a breath from the vacuum between in¬
habited worlds, in fact from nowhere: it was not what she
did or said but what she did not do and say. “Some other
time,” the girl said, and moved back toward her apart¬
ment door.

“Did you get my name?” he said eagerly. “John Isidore,
and I work for—”

“You told me who you work for.” She had stopped briefly
at her door; pushing it open she said, “Some incredible
person named Hannibal Sloat, who I’m sure doesn’t exist
outside your imagination. My name is—” She gave him one
last warmthless glance as she returned to her apartment,
hesitated, and said, “I’m Rachael Rosen.”

“Of the Rosen Association?” he asked. “The system’s
largest manufacturer of humanoid robots used in our colo¬
nization program?”

A complicated expression instantly crossed her face,
fleetingly, gone at once. “No,” she said. “I never heard of







68


PHILIP K. DICK


them; I don’t know anything about it. More of your chicken-
head imagination, I suppose. John Isidore and his personal,
private empathy box. Poor Mr. Isidore.”

“But your name suggests—”

“My name,” the girl said, “is Pris Stratton. That’s my
married name; I always use it. I never use any other name
but Pris. You can call me Pris.” She reflected, then said,
“No, you’d better address me as Miss Stratton. Because we
don’t really know each other. At least I don’t know you.”
The door shut after her and he found himself alone in the
dust-strewn dim hall.







7



Well, so it goes, J. R. Isidore thought as he stood clutching
his soft cube of margarine. Maybe she’ll change her mind
about letting me call her Pris. And possibly, if I can pick up
a can of pre-war vegetables, about dinner, too.

But maybe she doesn’t know how to cook, he thought
suddenly. Okay, I can do it; I’ll fix dinner for both of us.
And I’ll show her how so she can do it in the future if she
wants. She’ll probably want to, once I show her how; as
near as I can make out, most women, even young ones like
her, like to cook: it’s an instinct.

Ascending the darkened stairs, he returned to his own
apartment.

She’s really out of touch, he thought as he donned his
white work uniform; even if he hurried he’d be late to
work and Mr. Sloat would be angry, but so what? For in¬
stance, she’s never heard of Buster Friendly. And that’s
impossible; Buster is the most important human being
alive, except of course for Wilbur Mercer . . . but Mercer,
he reflected, isn’t a human being; he evidently is an arche-


69










70


PHILIP K. DICK


typal entity from the stars, superimposed on our culture
by a cosmic template. At least that’s what I’ve heard peo¬
ple say; that’s what Mr. Sloat says, for instance. And Han- i
nibal Sloat would know.

Odd that she isn’t consistent about her own name, he

pondered. She may need help. Can I give her any help? he ;

1

asked himself. A special, a chickenhead; what do I know? 1 j
can’t marry and 1 can’t emigrate and the dust vsdll eventu- j
ally kill me. 1 have nothing to offer.

Dressed and ready to go, he left his apartment and as¬
cended to the roof where his battered used hovercar lay
parked.

An hour later, in the company truck, he had picked up the
first malfunctioning animal for the day. An electric cat: it
lay in the plastic dust-proof carrying cage in the rear of
the truck and panted erratically. You’d almost think it was
real, Isidore observed as he headed back to the Van Ness
Pet Hospital—that carefully misnamed little enterprise
which barely existed in the tough, competitive field of
false-animal repair.

The cat, in its travail, groaned.

i

Wow, Isidore said to himself. It really sounds as if it’s |
dying. Maybe its ten-year battery has shorted, and all its
circuits are systematically burning out. A major job; Milt
Borogrove, Van Ness Pet Hospital’s repairman, would |
have his hands full. And I didn’t give the owner an esti- |
mate, Isidore realized gloomily. The guy simply thrust the j
cat at me, said it had begun failing during the night, and |
then I guess he took off for work. Anyhow, all of a sudden |





DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


71


the momentary verbal exchange had ceased; the cat’s
owner had gone roaring up into the sky in his custom new-
model handsome hovercar. And the man constituted a
new customer.

To the cat, Isidore said, “Can you hang on until we reach
the shop?” The cat continued to wheeze. “I’ll recharge you
while we’re en route,” Isidore decided; he dropped the
truck toward the nearest available roof and there, tem¬
porarily parked with the motor running, crawled into the
back of the truck and opened the plastic dust-proof carry¬
ing cage, which, in conjunction with his ovm white suit and
the name on the truck, created a total impression of a true
animal vet picking up a true animal.

The electric mechanism, within its compellingly authen¬
tic-style gray pelt, gurgled and blew bubbles, its vidlenses
glassy, its metal jaws locked together. This had always
amazed him, these “disease” circuits built into false ani¬
mals; the construct which he now held on his lap had been
put together in such a fashion that when a primary com¬
ponent misfired, the whole thing appeared—not broken—
but organically ill. It would have fooled me, Isidore said to
himself as he groped within the ersatz stomach fur for the
concealed control panel (quite small on this variety of false
animal) plus the quick-charge battery terminals. He could
find neither. Nor could he search very long; the mecha¬
nism had almost failed. If it does consist of a Short, he re¬
flected, which is busy burning out circuits, then maybe I
should try to detach one of the battery cables; the mecha¬
nism wdll shut down, but no more harm will be done. And
then, in the shop, Milt can charge it back up.










72


PHILIP K. DICK


Deftly, he ran his fingers along the pseudo bony spine.
The cables should be about here. Damn expert workman¬
ship; so absolutely perfect an imitation. Cables not appar¬
ent even under close scrutiny. Must be a Wheelright &amp;
Carpenter product—they cost more, but look what good
work they do.

He gave up; the false cat had ceased functioning, so evi¬
dently the short—if that was what ailed the thing—had fin¬
ished off the power supply and basic drive-train. That’ll
run into money, he thought pessimistically. Well, the guy
evidently hadn’t been getting the three-times-yearly pre¬
ventive cleaning and lubricating, which made all the differ¬
ence. Maybe this would teach the owner—the hard way.

Crawling back in the driver’s seat, he put the wheel into
climb position, buzzed up into the air once more, and re¬
sumed his flight back to the repair shop.

Anyhow he no longer had to listen to the nerve-wracking
wheezing of the construct; he could relax. Funny, he
thought; even though 1 know rationally it’s faked the sound
of a false animal, burning out its drive-train and power
supply ties my stomach in knots. 1 wash, he thought pain¬
fully, that 1 could get another job. If I hadn’t failed that IQ
test I wouldn’t be reduced to this ignominious task with its
attendant emotional by-products. On the other hand, the
synthetic sufferings of false animals didn’t bother Milt
Borogrove or their boss Hannibal Sloat. So maybe it’s I,
John Isidore said to himself. Maybe when you deteriorate
back down the ladder of evolution as I have, when you sink
into the tomb world slough of being a special—well, best to
abandon that line of inquiry. Nothing depressed him more









DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


73


than the moments in which he contrasted his current men¬
tal powers with what he had formerly possessed. Every day
he declined in sagacity and vigor. He and the thousands
of other specials throughout Terra, all of them moving
toward the ash heap. Turning into living kipple.

For company he clicked on the truck’s radio and tuned
for Buster Friendly’s aud show, which, like the TV version,
continued twenty-three unbroken warm hours a day . . .
the additional one hour being a religious sign-off, ten min¬
utes of silence, and then a religious sign-on.

“—glad to have you on the show again,” Buster Friendly
was saying. “Let’s see, Amanda; it’s been two whole days
since we’ve visited with you. Starting on any new pics,
dear?”

“Veil, I vuz goink to do a pic yestooday baht veil, dey
vanted me to staht ad seven—”

“Seven a.m.?” Buster Friendly broke in.

“Yess, dot’s right. Booster; it vuz seven hey hem!”
Amanda Werner laughed her famous laugh, nearly as imi¬
tated as Buster’s. Amanda Werner and several other
beautiful, elegant, conically breasted foreign ladies, from
unspecified vaguely defined countries, plus a few bucolic
so-called humorists, comprised Buster’s perpetual core of
repeats. Women like Amanda Werner never made movies,
never appeared in plays; they lived out their queer, beauti¬
ful lives as guests on Buster’s unending show, appearing,
Isidore had once calculated, as much as seventy hours
a week.

How did Buster Friendly find the time to tape both his aud
and vid shows? Isidore wondered. And how did Amanda












74


PHILIP K. DICK


Werner find time to be a guest every other day, month after
month, year after year? How did they keep talking? They
never repeated themselves—not so far as he could deter¬
mine. Their remarks, always witty, always new, weren’t re¬
hearsed. Amanda’s hair glowed, her eyes glinted’ her teeth
shone; she never ran down, never became tired, never
found herself at a loss as to a clever retort to Buster’s bang-
bang string of quips, jokes, and sharp observations. The
Buster Friendly Show, telecast and broadcast over all Earth
via satellite, also poured dovm on the emigrants of the
colony planets. Practice transmissions beamed to Proxima
had been attempted, in case human colonization extended
that far. Had the Salander 3 reached its destination, the
travelers aboard would have found the Buster Friendly
Show awaiting them. And they would have been glad.

But something about Buster Friendly irritated John
Isidore, one specific thing. In subtle, almost inconspicuous
ways, Buster ridiculed the empathy boxes. Not once but
many times. He was, in fact, doing it right now.

“—no rock nicks on me,” Buster prattled away to
Amanda Werner. “And if I’m going up the side of a moun¬
tain 1 want a couple of bottles of Budweiser beer along!”
The studio audience laughed, and Isidore heard a sprin¬
kling of handclaps. “And I’ll reveal my carefully docu¬
mented expose from up there —that expose coming exactly
ten hours from now!”

“Ent me, too, dahlink!” Amanda gushed. “Tek me wit
you! 1 go alonk en ven dey trow a rock et us 1 protek you!”
Again the audience howled, and John Isidore felt baffled
and impotent rage seep up into the back of his neck. Why
did Buster Friendly always chip away at Mercerism? No







DO ANDROfDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


75


one else seemed bothered by it; even the U.N. approved.
And the American and Soviet police had publicly stated
that Mercerism reduced crime by making citizens more
concerned about the plight of their neighbors. Mankind
needs more empathy, Titus Corning, the U.N. Secretary
General, had declared several times. Maybe Buster is jeal¬
ous, Isidore conjectured. Sure, that would explain it; he
and Wilbur Mercer are in competition. But for what?

Our minds, Isidore decided. They’re fighting for control
of our psychic selves; the empathy box on one hand,
Buster’s guffaws and off-the-cuff jibes on the other. I’ll
have to tell Hannibal Sloat that, he decided. Ask him if it’s
true; he’ll know.

When he had parked his truck on the roof of the Van Ness
Pet Hospital, he quickly carried the plastic cage containing
the inert false cat downstairs to Hannibal Sloat’s office. As
he entered, Mr. Sloat glanced up from a parts-inventory
page, his gray, seamed face rippling like troubled water.
Too old to emigrate, Hannibal Sloat, although not a special,
was doomed to creep out his remaining life on Earth. The
dust, over the years, had eroded him; it had left his fea¬
tures gray, his thoughts gray; it had shrunk him and made
his legs spindly and his gait unsteady. He saw the world
through glasses literally dense with dust. For some reason,
Sloat never cleaned his glasses. It was as if he had given
up; he had accepted the radioactive dirt and it had begun
its job, long ago, of burying him. Already it obscured his
sight. In the few years he had remaining it would corrupt
his other senses until at last only his bird-screech voice
would remain, and then that would expire, too.








76


PHILIP K. DICK


“What do you have there?” Mr. Sloat asked.

“A cat with a short in its power supply.” Isidore set the
cage down on the document-littered desk of his boss.

“Why show it to me?” Sloat demanded. “Take it dovm in
the shop to Milt.” However, reflexively, he opened the cage
and tugged the false animal out. Once, he had been a re¬
pairman. A very good one.

Isidore said, “I think Buster Friendly and Mercerism are
fighting for control of our psychic souls.”

“If so,” Sloat said, examining the cat, “Buster is winning.”

“He’s winning now,” Isidore said, “but ultimately he’ll
lose.”

Sloat lifted his head, peered at him. “Why?”

“Because Wilbur Mercer is always renewed. He’s eter¬
nal. At the top of the hill he’s struck down; he sinks into
the tomb world but then he rises inevitably. And us with
him. So we’re eternal, too.” He felt good, speaking so well;
usually around Mr. Sloat he stammered.

Sloat said, “Buster is immortal, like Mercer. There’s no
difference.”

“How can he be? He’s a man.”

“I don’t know,” Sloat said. “But it’s true. They’ve never
admitted it, of course.”

“Is that how come Buster Friendly can do forty-six
' hours of show a day?”

“That’s right,” Sloat said.

“What about Amanda Werner and those other women?”

“They’re immortal, too.”

“Are they a superior life-form from another system?”

“I’ve never been able to determine that for sure,” Mr.
Sloat said, still examining the cat. He now removed his





DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


77


dust-filmed glasses, peered without them at the half-open
mouth. “As 1 have conclusively in the case of Wilhur Mer¬
cer,” he finished almost inaudibly. He cursed then, a string
of abuse lasting what seemed to Isidore a full minute.
“This cat,” Sloat said finally, “isn’t false. 1 knew sometime
this would happen. And it’s dead.” He stared down at the
corpse of the cat. And cursed again.

Wearing his grimy blue sailcloth apron, burly pebble¬
skinned Milt Borogrove appeared at the office door.
“What’s the matter?” he said. Seeing the cat, he entered
the office and picked up the animal.

“The chickenhead,” Sloat said, “brought it in.” Never
before had he used that term in front of Isidore.

“If it was still alive,” Milt said, “we could take it to a real
animal vet. I wonder what it’s worth. Anybody got a copy
of Sidney’sV

“D-Doesn’t y-y-your insurance c-c-cover this?” Isidore
asked Mr. Sloat. Under him his legs wavered and he felt
the room begin to turn dark maroon cast over with specks
of green.

“Yes,” Sloat said finally, half snarling. “But it’s the waste
that gets me. The loss of one more living creature. Couldn’t
you tell, Isidore? Didn’t you notice the difference?”

“I thought,” Isidore managed to say, “it was a really
good job. So good it fooled me; I mean, it seemed alive,
and a job that good—”

“I don’t think Isidore can tell the difference,” Milt said
mildly. “To him they’re all alive, false animals included.
He probably tried to save it.” To Isidore he said, “What did
you do, try to recharge its battery? Or locate a short in it?”

“Y-Yes,” Isidore admitted.











78


PHILIP K. DICK


“It probably was so far gone it wouldn’t have made it
anyhow,” Milt said. “Let the chickenhead off the hook,
Han. He’s got a point; the fakes are beginning to be darn
near real, what with those disease circuits they’re building
into the new ones. And living animals do die; that’s one of
the risks in owning them. We’re just not used to it because
all we see are fakes.”

“The goddamn waste,” Sloat said.

“According to M-Mercer,” Isidore pointed out, “a-all life
returns. The cycle is c-c-complete for a-a-animals, too. I
mean, we all ascend with him, die—”

“Tell that to the guy that owned this cat,” Mr. Sloat said.

Not sure if his boss was serious, Isidore said, “You
mean I have to? But you always handle vidcalls.” He had a
phobia about the vidphone and found making a call, espe¬
cially to a stranger, virtually impossible. Mr. Sloat, of
course, knew this.

“Don’t make him,” Milt said. “I’ll do it.” He reached for
the receiver. “What’s his number?”

“I’ve got it here somewhere.” Isidore fumbled in his
work smock pockets.

Sloat said, “I want the chickenhead to do it.”

“I c-c-can’t use the vidphone,” Isidore protested, his
heart laboring. “Because I’m hairy, ugly, dirty, stooped,
snaggle-toothed, and gray. And also I feel sick from the ra¬
diation; I think I’m going to die.”

Milt smiled and said to Sloat, “I guess if I felt that way I
wouldn’t use the vidphone either. Come on, Isidore; if you
don’t give me the owner’s number I can’t make the call
and you’ll have to.” He held out his hand amiably.







DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


79


“The chickenhead makes it,” Sloat said, “or he’s fired.”
He did not look either at Isidore or at Milt; he glared
fixedly forward.

“Aw come on,” Milt protested.

Isidore said, “I d-d-don’t like to be c-c-called a chicken-
head. I mean, the d-d-dust has d-d-done a lot to you, too,

f

physically. Although maybe n-n-not your brain, as in m-my
case.” I’m fired, he realized. I can’t make the call. And then
all at once he remembered that the owner of the cat had
zipped off to work. There would be no one home. “I g-guess
I can call him,” he said, as he fished out the tag with the in¬
formation on it.

“See?” Mr. Sloat said to Milt. “He can do it if he has to.”

Seated at the vidphone, receiver in hand, Isidore dialed.

“Yeah,” Milt said, “but he shouldn’t have to. And he’s
right; the dust has affected you; you’re damn near blind
and in a couple of years you won’t be able to hear.”

Sloat said, “It’s got to you, too, Borogrove. Your skin is
the color of dog manure.”

On the vidscreen a face appeared, a mitteleuropdische
somewhat careful-looking woman who wore her hair in a
tight bun. “Yes?” she said.

“M-M-Mrs. Pilsen?” Isidore said, terror spewing through
him; he had not thought of it naturally but the owner had a
wdfe, who of course was home. “I want to t-t-talk to you
about your c-c-c-c-c-c—” He broke off, rubbed his chin tic-
wise. “Your cat.”

“Oh yes, you picked up Horace,” Mrs. Pilsen said. “Did
it turn out to be pneumonitis? That’s what Mr. Pilsen
thought.”






80


PHILIP K. DICK


Isidore said, “Your cat died.”

“Oh no god in heaven.”

“We’ll replace it,” he said. “We have insurance.” He
glanced toward Mr. Sloat; he seemed to concur. “The
owner of our firm, Mr. Hannibal Sloat—” He floundered.
“Will personally—”

“No,” Sloat said, “we’ll give them a check. Sidney’s list
price.”

“—will personally pick the replacement cat out for you,”
Isidore found himself saying. Having started a conversa¬
tion which he could not endure, he discovered himself un¬
able to get back out. What he was saying possessed an
intrinsic logic which he had no means of halting; it had to
grind to its own conclusion. Both Mr. Sloat and Milt Boro-
grove stared at him as he rattled on, “Give us the specifi¬
cations of the cat you desire. Color, sex, subtype, such as
Manx, Persian, Abyssinian—”

“Horace is dead,” Mrs. Pilsen said.

“He had pneumonitis,” Isidore said. “He died on the trip
to the hospital. Our senior staff physician. Dr. Hannibal
Sloat, expressed the belief that nothing at this point could
have saved him. But isn’t it fortunate, Mrs. Pilsen, that
we’re going to replace him. Am I correct?”

Mrs. Pilsen, tears appearing in her eyes, said, “There is
only one cat like Horace. He used to—when he was just a
kitten—stand and stare up at us as if asking a question.
We never understood what the question was. Maybe now
he knows the answer.” Fresh tears appeared. “I guess we
all will eventually.”

An inspiration came to Isidore. “What about an exact
electric duplicate of your cat? We can have a superb hand-







DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


81


crafted job by Wheelright &amp; Carpenter in which every detail
of the old animal is faithfully repeated in permanent—”

“Oh that’s dreadful!” Mrs. Pilsen protested. “What are
you saying? Don’t tell my husband that; don’t suggest that
to Ed or he’ll go mad. He loved Horace more than any cat
he ever had, and he’s had a cat since he was a child.”

Taking the vidphone receiver from Isidore, Milt said to
the woman, “We can give you a check in the amount of
Sidney’s list, or as Mr. Isidore suggested we can pick out a
new cat for you. We’re very sorry that your cat died, but
as Mr. Isidore pointed out, the cat had pneumonitis, which
is almost always fatal.” His tone rolled out professionally;
of the three of them at the Van Ness Pet Hospital, Milt per¬
formed the best in the matter of business phone calls.

“I can’t tell my husband,” Mrs. Pilsen said.

“All right, ma’am,” Milt said, and grimaced slightly.
“We’ll call him. Would you give me his number at his place
of employment?” He groped for a pen and pad of paper;
Mr. Sloat handed them to him.

“Listen,” Mrs. Pilsen said; she seemed now to rally.
“Maybe the other gentleman is right. Maybe I ought to
commission an electric replacement of Horace but without
Ed ever knowing; could it be so faithful a reproduction
that my husband wouldn’t be able to tell?”

Dubiously, Milt said, “If that’s what you want. But it’s
been our experience that the owner of the animal is never
fooled. It’s only casual observers such as neighbors. You
see, once you get real close to a false animal—”

“Ed never got physically close to Horace, even though
he loved him; I was the one who took care of all Horace’s
personal needs such as his sandbox. I think I would like to







82


PHILIP K. DICK


try a false animal, and if it didn’t work then you could find
us a real cat to replace Horace. 1 just don’t want my hus¬
band to know; I don’t think he could live through it. That’s
why he never got close to Horace; he was afraid to. And
when Horace got sick—with pneumonitis, as you tell me—
Ed got panic-stricken and just wouldn’t face it. That’s why
we waited so long to call you. Too long ... as I knew be¬
fore you called. 1 knew.” She nodded, her tears under con¬
trol now. “How long will it take?”

Milt essayed, “We can have it ready in ten days. We’ll
deliver it during the day while your husband is at work.”
He wound up the call, said good-bye, and hung up. “He’ll
know,” he said to Mr. Sloat. “In five seconds. But that’s
what she wants.”

“Owners who get to love their animals,” Sloat said
somberly, “go to pieces. I’m glad we’re not usually in¬
volved with real animals. You realize that actual animal
vets have to make calls like that all the time?” He contem¬
plated John Isidore. “In some ways you’re not so stupid af¬
ter all, Isidore. You handled that reasonably well. Even
though Milt had to come in and take over.”

“He was doing fine,” Milt said. “God, that was tough.”
He picked up the dead Horace. “I’ll take this down to the
shop; Han, you phone Wheelright &amp; Carpenter and get
their builder over to measure and photograph it. I’m not
going to let them take it to their shop; I want to compare
the replica myself.”

“I think I’ll have Isidore talk to them,” Mr. Sloat de¬
cided. “He got this started; he ought to be able to deal with
Wheelright &amp; Carpenter after handling Mrs. Pilsen.”









DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


83


Milt said to Isidore, “Just don’t let them take the origi¬
nal.” He held up Horace. “They’ll want to because it
makes their work a hell of a lot easier. Be firm.”

“Um,” Isidore said, blinking. “Okay. Maybe I ought to
call them now before it starts to decay. Don’t dead bodies
decay or something?” He felt elated.









After parking the department’s speedy beefed-up hover-
car on the roof of the San Francisco Hall of Justice on
Lombard Street, bounty hunter Rick Deckard, briefcase in
hand, descended to Harry Bryant’s office.

“You’re back awfully soon,” his superior said, leaning
back in his chair and taking a pinch of Specific No. 1 snuff.

“1 got what you sent me for.” Rick seated himself facing
the desk. He set his briefcase down. I’m tired, he realized.
It had begun to hit him, now that he had gotten back; he
wondered if he would be able to recoup enough for the job
ahead. “How’s Dave?” he asked. “Well enough for me to
go talk to him? 1 want to before 1 tackle the first of the
andys.”

Bryant said, “You’ll be trying for Polokov first. The one
that lasered Dave. Best to get him right out oFit, since he
knows we’ve got him listed.”

“Before 1 talk to Dave?”

Bryant reached for a sheet of onionskin paper, a


84






DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


85


blurred third or fourth carbon. “Polokov has taken a job
with the city as a trash collector, a scavenger.”

“Don’t only specials do that kind of work?”

“Polokov is mimicking a special, an anthead. Very dete¬
riorated^—or so he pretends to be. That’s what suckered
Dave; Polokov apparently looks and acts so much like an
anthead that Dave forgot. Are you sure about the Voigt-
Kampff scale now? You’re absolutely certain, from what
happened up in Seattle, that—”

“1 am,” Rick said shortly. He did not amplify.

Bryant said, “I’ll take your word for it. But there can’t
be even one slip-up.”

“There never could be in andy hunting. This is no
different.”

“The Nexus-6 is different.”

“1 already found my first one,” Rick said. “And Dave
found two. Three, if you count Polokov. Okay, I’ll retire
Polokov today, and then maybe tonight or tomorrow talk
to Dave.” He reached for the blurred carbon, the poop
sheet on the android Polokov.

“One more item,” Bryant said. “A Soviet cop, from the
W.P.O., is on his way here. While you were in Seattle 1 got
a call from him; he’s aboard an Aeroflot rocket that’ll
touch dovm at the public field, here, in about an hour.
Sandor Kadalyi, his name is.”

“What’s he want?” Rarely if ever did W.P.O. cops show
up in San Francisco.

“W.P.O. is enough interested in the new Nexus-6 types
that they want a man of theirs to be with you. An ob¬
server—and also, if he can, he’ll assist you. It’s for you to










86


PHILIP K. DICK


decide when and if he can he of value. But I’ve already
given him permission to tag along.” |

“What about the bounty?” Rick said. j

“You won’t have to split it,” Bryant said, and smiled
creakily.

“I just wouldn’t regard it as financially fair.” He had ab¬
solutely no intention of sharing his winnings with a thug
from W.P.O. He studied the poop sheet on Polokov; it gave
a description of the man—or rather the andy—and his
current address and place of business: the Bay Area Scav¬
engers Company with offices on Geary.

“Want to wait on the Polokov retirement until the Soviet
cop gets here to help you?” Bryant asked.

Rick bristled. “I’ve always worked alone. Of course, it’s
your decision—I’ll do whatever you say. But I’d just as
soon tackle Polokov right now, without waiting for Kadalyi
to hit town.”

“You go ahead on your own,” Bryant decided. “And then
on the next one, which’ll be a Miss Luba Luft—you have the
sheet there on her, too—you can bring in Kadalyi.”

Having stuffed the onionskin carbons in his briefcase,
Rick left his superior’s office and ascended once more to
the roof and his parked hovercar. And now let’s visit Mr.
Polokov, he said to himself. He patted his laser tube.

For his first try at the android Polokov, Rick stopped off at
the offices of the Bay Area Scavengers Company.

“I’m looking for an employee of yours,” he said to the
severe, gray-haired switchboard woman. The scavengers’
building impressed him; large and modern, it held a good
number of high-class purely office employees. The deep-








DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


87


pile carpets, the expensive genuine wood desks, reminded
him that garbage collecting and trash disposal had, since
the war, become one of Earth’s important industries. The
entire planet had begun to disintegrate into junk, and to
keep the planet habitable for the remaining population the
junk had to be hauled away occasionally ... or, as Buster
Friendly liked to declare. Earth would die under a layer—
not of radioactive dust—but of kipple.

“Mr. Ackers,” the switchboard woman informed him.

! “He’s the personnel manager.” She pointed to an impressive
j but imitation oak desk at which sat a prissy, tiny, bespec-
I tacled individual, merged with his plethora of paperwork.

Rick presented his police ID. “Where’s your employee
Polokov right now? At his job or at home?”

; After reluctantly consulting his records, Mr. Ackers
said, “Polokov ought to be at work. Flattening hovercars at
our Daly City plant and dumping them into the Bay. How¬
ever—” The personnel manager consulted a further docu¬
ment, then picked up his vidphone and made an inside call
to someone else in the building. “He’s not, then,” he said,
terminating the call; hanging up, he said to Rick, “Polokov
didn’t show up for work today. No explanation. What’s he
done, officer?”

“If he should show up,” Rick said, “don’t tell him 1 was
here asking about him. You understand?”

“Yes, 1 understand,” Ackers said sulkily, as if his deep
schooling in police matters had been derided.

In the department’s beefed-up hovercar Rick next flew
to Polokov’s apartment building in the Tenderloin. We’ll
never get him, he told himself. They—Bryant and Holden—
waited too long. Instead of sending me to Seattle, Bryant











88


PHILIP K. DICK


should have sicced me on Polokov—better still last night,
as soon as Dave Holden got his.

What a grimy place, he observed as he walked across
the roof to the elevator. Abandoned animal pens, en¬
crusted with months of dust. And, in one cage, a no longer
functioning false animal, a chicken. By elevator he de¬
scended to Polokov’s floor, found the hall unlit, like a sub¬
terranean cave. Using his police A-powered sealed-beam
light, he illuminated the hall and once again glanced over
the onionskin carbon. The Voigt-Kampff test had been ad¬
ministered to Polokov; that part could be bypassed, and he
could go directly to the task of destroying the android.

Best to get him from out here, he decided. Setting down
his weapons kit he fumbled it open, got out a nondirec-
tional Penfield wave transmitter; he punched the key for
catalepsy, himself protected against the mood emanation
by means of a counterwave broadcast through the trans¬
mitter’s metal hull directed to him alone.

They’re now all frozen stiff, he said to himself as he
shut off the transmitter. Everyone, human and andy alike,
in the vicinity. No risk to me; all I have to do is walk in and
laser him. Assuming, of course, that he’s in his apartment,
which isn’t likely.

Using an infinity key, which analyzed and opened all
forms of locks known, he entered Polokov’s apartment,
laser beam in hand.

No Polokov. Only semi-ruined furniture, a place of kip-
ple and decay. In fact no personal articles: what greeted
him consisted of unclaimed debris which Polokov had in¬
herited when he took the apartment and which in leaving
he had abandoned to the next—if any—tenant.







DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


89


I knew it, he said to himself. Well, there goes the first
thousand dollars’ bounty; probably skipped all the way to
the Antarctic Circle. Out of my jurisdiction; another bounty
hunter from another police department will retire Polokov
and claim the money. On, I suppose, to the andys who
haven’t been warned, as was Polokov. On to Luba Luft.

Back again on the roof in his hovercar he reported by
phone to Harry Bryant. “No luck on Polokov. Left probably
right after he lasered Dave.” He inspected his wristwatch.
“Want me to pick up Kadalyi at the field? It’ll save time
and I’m eager to get started on Miss Luft.” He already had
the poop sheet on her laid out before him, had begun a
thorough study of it.

“Good idea,” Bryant said, “except that Mr. Kadalyi is al¬
ready here; his Aeroflot ship—as usual, he says—arrived
early. Just a moment.” An invisible conference. “He’ll fly
over and meet you where you are now,” Bryant said, re¬
turning to the screen. “Meanwhile read up on Miss Luft.”

“An opera singer. Allegedly from Germany. At present
attached to the San Francisco Opera Company.” He nod¬
ded in reflexive agreement, his mind on the poop sheet.
“Must have a good voice to make connections so fast.
Okay, I’ll wait here for Kadalyi.” He gave Bryant his loca¬
tion and rang off.

I’ll pose as an opera fan, Rick decided as he read fur¬
ther. I particularly would like to see her as Donna Anna in
Don Giovanni. In my personal collection I have tapes by
such old-time greats as Elisabeth Schwarzkopf and Lotte
Lehmann and Lisa Della Casa; that’ll give us something to
discuss while I set up my Voigt-Kampff equipment.

His car phone buzzed. He picked up the receiver.








90


PHILIP K. DICK


The police operator said, “Mr. Deckard, a call for you
from Seattle; Mr. Bryant said to put it through to you. |
From the Rosen Association.” !

“Okay,” Rick said, and waited. What do they want? he |
wondered. As far as he could discern, the Rosens had al- !
ready proven to be bad news. And undoubtedly would con- |
tinue so, whatever they intended.

Rachael Rosen’s face appeared on the tiny screen.
“Hello, Officer Deckard.” Her tone seemed placating; that
caught his attention. “Are you busy right now or can 1 talk
to you?”

“Go ahead,” he said.

“We of the association have been discussing your situa¬
tion regarding the escaped Nexus-6 types, and knowing
them as we do, we feel that you’ll have better luck if one of
us works in conjunction with you,”

“By doing what?”

“Well, by one of us coming along with you. When you go
out looking for them.”

“Why? What would you add?”

Rachael said, “The Nexus-6s would be wary at being
approached by a human. But if another Nexus-6 made the
contact—”

“You specifically mean yourself.”

“Yes.” She nodded, her face sober.

“I’ve got too much help already.”

“But 1 really think you need me.”

“1 doubt it. I’ll think it over and call you back.” At some
distant, unspecified future time, he said to himself. Or
more likely never. That’s all I need: Rachael Rosen pop¬
ping up through the dust at every step.





DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


91


“You don’t really mean it,” Rachael said. “You’ll never
call me. You don’t realize how agile an illegal escaped
Nexus-6 is, how impossible it’ll be for you. We feel we owe
you this because of—you know. What we did.”

“I’ll take it under advisement.” He started to hang up.

“Without me,” Rachael said, “one of them will get you
before you can get it.”

“Good-bye,” he said and hung up. What kind of world is
it, he asked himself, when an android phones up a bounty
hunter and offers him assistance? He rang the police oper¬
ator back. “Don’t put any more calls through to me from
Seattle,” he said.

“Yes, Mr. Deckard. Has Mr. Kadalyi reached you yet?”

“I’m still waiting. And he had better hurry because I’m
not going to be here long.” Again he hung up.

As he resumed reading the poop sheet on Luba Luft, a
hovercar taxi spun down to land on the roof a few yards
off. From it a red-faced, cherubic-looking man, evidently
in his mid-fifties, wearing a heavy and impressive Rus-
sian-style greatcoat, stepped and, smiling, his hand ex¬
tended, approached Rick’s car.

“Mr. Deckard?” the man asked with a Slavic accent.
“The bounty hunter for the San Francisco Police Depart¬
ment?” The empty taxi rose, and the Russian watched it
go, absently. “I’m Sandor Kadalyi,” the man said, and
opened the car door to squeeze in beside Rick.

As he shook hands with Kadalyi, Rick noticed that the
W.P.O. representative carried an unusual type of laser
tube, a subform which he had never seen before.

“Oh, this?” Kadalyi said. “Interesting, isn’t it?” He tugged
it from his belt holster. “I got this on Mars.”










92


PHILIP K. DICK


“I thought I knew every handgun made,” Rick said.
“Even those manufactured at and for use in the colonies.”

“We made this ourselves,” Kadalyi said, beaming like a
Slavic Santa, his ruddy face inscribed with pride. “You like
it? What is different about it, functionally, is—here, take
it.” He passed the gun over to Rick, who inspected it ex¬
pertly, by way of years of experience.

“How does it differ functionally?” Rick asked. He
couldn’t tell.

“Press the trigger.”

Aiming upward, out the window of the car, Rick
squeezed the trigger of the weapon. Nothing happened; no
beam emerged. Puzzled, he turned to Kadalyi.

“The triggering circuit,” Kadalyi said cheerfully, “isn’t
attached. It remains with me. You see?” He opened his
hand, revealed a tiny unit. “And I can also direct it, within
certain limits. Irrespective of where it’s aimed.”

“You’re not Polokov, you’re Kadalyi,” Rick said.

“Don’t you mean that the other way around? You’re a
bit confused.”

“I mean you’re Polokov, the android; you’re not from
the Soviet police.” Rick, with his toe, pressed the emer¬
gency button on the floor of his car.

“Why won’t my laser tube fire?” Kadalyi-Polokov said,
switching on and off the miniaturized triggering and aim¬
ing device which he held in the palm of his hand.

“A sine wave,” Rick said. “That phases out laser emana¬
tion and spreads the beam into ordinary light.”

“Then I’ll have to break your pencil neck.” The android
dropped the device and, with a snarl, grabbed with both
hands for Rick’s throat.




DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


93


As the android’s hands sank into his throat, Rick fired
his regulation issue old-style pistol from its shoulder hol¬
ster; the .38 magnum slug struck the android in the head
and its brain box burst. The Nexus-6 unit which operated
it blew into pieces, a raging, mad wind which carried
throughout the car. Bits of it, like the radioactive dust it¬
self, whirled down on Rick. The retired remains of the an¬
droid rocked back, collided with the car door, bounced off
and struck heavily against him; he found himself strug¬
gling to shove the twitching remnants of the android away.

Shakily, he at last reached for the car phone, called in
to the Hall of Justice. “Shall 1 make my report?” he said.
“Tell Harry Bryant that I got Polokov.”

“ ‘You got Polokov.’ He’ll understand that, will he?”

“Yes,” Rick said, and hung up. Christ that came close, he
said to himself. I must have overreacted to Rachael Rosen’s
warning; I went the other way and it almost finished me.
But 1 got Polokov, he said to himself. His adrenal gland, by
degrees, ceased pumping its several secretions into his
bloodstream; his heart slowed to normal, his breathing be¬
came less frantic. But he still shook. Anyhow 1 made myself
a thousand dollars just now, he informed himself. So it was
worth it. And I’m faster to react than Dave Holden. Of
course, however, Dave’s experience evidently prepared me;
that has to be admitted. Dave had not had such warning.

Again picking up the phone, he placed a call home to his
apt, to Iran. Meanwhile he managed to light a cigarette;
the shaking had begun to depart.

. His wife’s face, sodden with the six-hour self-accusatory
depression which she had prophesied, manifested itself on
the vidscreen. “Oh hello, Rick.”








94


PHILIP K. DICK


“What happened to the 594 I dialed for you before I
left? Pleased acknowledgment of—”

“1 redialed. As soon as you left. What do you want?” Her
voice sank into a dreary drone of despond. “I’m so tired
and 1 just have no hope left, of anything. Of our marriage
and you possibly getting killed by one of those andys. Is
that what you want to tell me, Rick? That an andy got
you?” In the background the racket of Buster Friendly
boomed and brayed, eradicating her words; he saw her
mouth moving but heard only the TV.

“Listen,” he broke in. “Can you hear me? I’m on to
something. A new type of android that apparently nobody
can handle but me. I’ve retired one already, so that’s a
grand to start with. You know what we’re going to have
before I’m through?”

Iran stared at him sightlessly. “Oh,” she said, nodding.

“I haven’t said yet!” He could tell now; her depression
this time had become too vast for her even to hear him.
For all intents he spoke into a vacuum. “I’ll see you
tonight,” he finished bitterly and slammed the receiver
down. Damn her, he said to himself. What good does it do,
my risking my life? She doesn’t care whether we ovm an
ostrich or not; nothing penetrates. I wish I had gotten rid
of her two years ago when we were considering splitting
up. I can still do it, he reminded himself.

Broodingly, he leaned down, gathered together on the
car floor his crumpled papers, including the info on Luba
Luft. No support, he informed himself. Most androids I’ve
known have more vitality and desire to live than my wife.
She has nothing to give me.




DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


95


That made him think of Rachael Rosen again. Her ad¬
vice to me as to the Nexus-6 mentality, he realized, turned
out to be correct. Assuming she doesn’t want any of the
bounty money, maybe 1 could use her.

The encounter with Kadalyi-Polokov had changed his
ideas rather massively.

Snapping on his hovercar’s engine, he whisked nippity-
nip up into the sky, heading toward the old War Memorial
Opera House, where, according to Dave Holden’s notes, he
would find Luba Luft this time of the day.

He wondered, now, about her, too. Some female an¬
droids seemed to him pretty; he had found himself physi¬
cally attracted by several, and it was an odd sensation,
knowing intellectually that they were machines, but emo¬
tionally reacting anyhow.

For example Rachael Rosen. No, he decided; she’s too
thin. No real development, especially in the bust. A figure
like a child’s, flat and tame. He could do better. How old
did the poop sheet say Luba Luft was? As he drove he
hauled out the now wrinkled notes, found her so-called
“age.” Twenty-eight, the sheet read. Judged by appear¬
ance, which, with andys, was the only useful standard.

It’s a good thing I know something about opera, Rick re¬
flected. That’s another advantage I have over Dave; I’m
more culturally oriented.

I’ll try one more andy before I ask Rachael for help, he
decided. If Miss Luft proves exceptionally hard—but he had
an intuition she wouldn’t. Polokov had been the rough one;
the others, unaware that anyone actively hunted them,
would crumble in succession, plugged like a file of ducks.


96


PHILIP K. DICK


As he descended toward the ornate, expansive roof
of the opera house he loudly sang a potpourri of arias,
with pseudo-Italian words made up on the spot by him¬
self; even without the Penfield mood organ at hand his
spirits brightened into optimism. And into hungry, glee¬
ful anticipation.








In the enormous whale-belly of steel and stone carved out
to form the long-enduring old opera house, Rick Deckard
found an echoing, noisy, slightly miscontrived rehearsal
taking place. As he entered he recognized the music:
Mozart’s The Magic Flute, the first act in its final scenes.
The Moor’s slaves—in other words the chorus—had taken
up their song a bar too soon and this had nullified the sim¬
ple rhythm of the magic bells.

What a pleasure; he loved The Magic Flute. He seated
himself in a dress circle seat (no one appeared to notice
him) and made himself comfortable. Now Papageno in his
fantastic pelt of bird feathers had joined Pamina to sing
words which always brought tears to Rick’s eyes, when
and if he happened to think about it.

Konnte jeder brave Mann
solche Glockchen finden,
seine Feinde wiirden dann
ohne Miihe schwinden.


97


98


PHILIP K. DICK


Well, Rick thought, in real life no such magic hells exist
that make your enemy effortlessly disappear. Too had.
And Mozart, not long after writing The Magic Flute, had
died—in his thirties—of kidney disease. And had heen
huried in an unmarked pauper’s grave.

Thinking this, he wondered if Mozart had had any intu¬
ition that the future did not exist, that he had already used
up his little time. Mayhe I have, too, Rick thought as he
watched the rehearsal move along. This rehearsal will end,
the performance will end, the singers will die, eventually
the last score of the music will he destroyed in one way or
another; finally the name “Mozart” will vanish, the dust
will have won. If not on this planet then another. We can
evade it awhile. As the andys can evade me and exist a fi¬
nite stretch longer. But 1 get them or some other bounty
hunter gets them. In a way, he realized, Tm part of the
form-destroying process of entropy. The Rosen Association
creates and 1 unmake. Or anyhow so it must seem to them.

On the stage Papageno and Pamina engaged in a dia¬
logue. He stopped his introspection to listen.

Papageno: “My child, what should we now say?”

Pamina: “The truth. That’s what we will say.”

Leaning forward and peering, Rick studied Pamina in
her heavy, convoluted rohes, with her wimple trailing its
veil about her shoulders and face. He reexamined the
poop sheet, then leaned back, satisfied. I’ve now seen my
third Nexus-6 android, he realized. This is Luba Luft. A lit¬
tle ironic, the sentiment her role calls for. However vital.





DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


99


active, and nice-looking, an escaped android could hardly
tell the truth; about itself, anyhow.

On the stage Luba Luft sang, and he found himself sur¬
prised at the quality of her voice; it rated with that of the
best, even that of notables in his collection of historic
tapes. The Rosen Association built her well, he had to ad¬
mit. And again he perceived himself sub specie aeterni-
tatis, the form-destroyer called forth by what he heard
and saw here. Perhaps the better she functions, the better
a singer she is, the more I am needed. If the androids had
remained substandard, like the ancient q-40s made by De¬
rain Associates—there would be no problem and no need
of my skill. I wonder when 1 should do it, he asked himself.
As soon as possible, probably. At the end of the rehearsal
when she goes to her dressing room.

At the end of the act the rehearsal ended temporarily. It
would resume, the conductor said in English, French, and
German, in an hour and a half. The conductor then de¬
parted; the musicians left their instruments and also left.
Getting to his feet, Rick made his way backstage to the
dressing rooms; he followed the tail end of the cast, taking
his time and thinking. It’s better this way, getting it imme¬
diately over with. I’ll spend as short a time talking to her
and testing her as possible. As soon as I’m sure—but tech¬
nically he could not be sure until after the test. Maybe
Dave guessed wrong on her, he conjectured. I hope so. But
he doubted it. Already, instinctively, his professional sense
had responded. And he had yet to err . . . throughout
years with the department.

Stopping a super, he asked for Miss Luffs dressing



100


PHILIP K. DICK


room; the super, wearing makeup and the costume of an
Egyptian spear carrier, pointed. Rick arrived at the indi¬
cated door, saw an ink-written note tacked to it reading
MISS LUFT PRIVATE, and knocked.

“Come in.”

He entered. The girl sat at her dressing table, a much-
handled clothbound score open on her knees, marking
here and there with a ballpoint pen. She still wore her cos¬
tume and makeup, except for the wimple; that she had set
down on its rack. “Yes?” she said, looking up. The stage
makeup enlarged her eyes; enormous and hazel, they
fixed on him and did not waver. “I am busy, as you can
see.” Her English contained no remnant of an accent.

Rick said, “You compare favorably to Schwarzkopf.”

“Who are you?” Her tone held cold reserve—and that
other cold, which he had encountered in so many an¬
droids. Always the same: great intellect, ability to accom¬
plish much, but also this. He deplored it. And yet, without
it, he could not track them down.

“Tm from the San Francisco Police Department,” he said.

“Oh?” The huge and intense eyes did not flicker, did not
respond. “What are you here about?” Her tone, oddly,
seemed gracious.

Seating himself in a nearby chair, he unzipped his brief¬
case. “I have been sent here to administer a standard
personality-profile test to you. It won’t take more than a
few minutes.”

“Is it necessary?” She gestured toward the big cloth-
bound score. “I have a good deal I must do.” Now she had
begun to look apprehensive.








DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


101


“It’s necessary.” He got out the Voigt-Kampff instru¬
ments, began setting them up.

“An IQ test?”

“No. Empathy.”

“I’ll have to put on my glasses.” She reached to open a
drawer of her dressing table.

“If you can mark the score without your glasses, you can
take this test. I’ll show you some pictures and ask you sev¬
eral questions. Meanwhile—” He got up and walked to her,
and, bending, pressed the adhesive pad of sensitive grids
against her deeply tinted cheek. “And this light,” he said,
adjusting the angle of the pencil beam, “and that’s it.”

“Do you think I’m an android? Is that it?” Her voice had
faded almost to extinction. “I’m not an android. I haven’t
even been on Mars; I’ve never even seen an android!” Her
elongated lashes shuddered involuntarily; he saw her try¬
ing to appear calm. “Do you have information that there’s
an android in the cast? I’d be glad to help you, and if I
were an android would I be glad to help you?”

“An android,” he said, “doesn’t care what happens to
another android. That’s one of the indications we look for.”

“Then,” Miss Luft said, “you must be an android.”

That stopped him; he stared at her.

“Because,” she continued, “your job is to kill them, isn’t
it? You’re what they call—” She tried to remember.

“A bounty hunter,” Rick said. “But I’m not an android.”

“This test you want to give me.” Her voice, now, had be¬
gun to return. “Have you taken it?”

“Yes.” He nodded. “A long, long time ago; when I first
started with the department.”



102


PHILIP K. DICK


“Maybe that’s a false memory. Don’t androids some¬
times go around with false memories?”

Rick said, “My superiors know about the test. It’s
mandatory.”

“Maybe there was once a human who looked like you,

«

and somewhere along the line you killed him and took his
place. And your superiors don’t know.” She smiled. As if
inviting him to agree.

“Let’s get on with the test,” he said, getting out the
sheets of questions.

“I’ll take the test,” Luba Luft said, “if you’ll take it first,”

Again he stared at her, stopped in his tracks.

“Wouldn’t that be more fair?” she asked. “Then 1 could
be sure of you. 1 don’t know; you seem so peculiar and hard
and strange.” She shivered, then smiled again. Hopefully.

“You wouldn’t he able to administer the Voigt-Kampff
test. It takes considerable experience. Now please listen
carefully. These questions will deal with social situations
which you might find yourself in; what 1 want from you is a
statement of response, what you’d do. And 1 want the re¬
sponse as quickly as you can give it. One of the factors I’ll
record is the time lag, if any.” He selected his initial ques¬
tion. “You’re sitting watching TV and suddenly you dis¬
cover a wasp crawling on your wrist.” He checked wdth his
watch, counting the seconds. And checked, too, with the
twin dials.

“What’s a wasp?” Luba Luft asked.

“A stinging bug that flies.”

“Oh, how strange.” Her immense eyes widened with
childlike acceptance, as if he had revealed the cardinal mys¬
tery of creation. “Do they still exist? I’ve never seen one.”


i


1

I






DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


103


“They died out because of the dust. Don’t you really
know what a wasp is? You must have been alive when
there were wasps; that’s only been—”

“Tell me the German word.”

He tried to think of the German word for wasp but
couldn’t. “Your English is perfect,” he said angrily.

“My accent,” she corrected, “is perfect. It has to be, for
roles, for Purcell and Walton and Vaughn Williams. But
my vocabulary isn’t very large.” She glanced at him shyly.

^Wespe, ” he said, remembering the German word.

“Ach yes; eine Wespe.'' She laughed. “And what was the
question? I forget already.”

“Let’s try another.” Impossible now to get a meaningful
response. “You are watching an old movie on TV, a movie
from before the war. It shows a banquet in progress; the
entree”—he skipped over the first part of the question—
“consists of boiled dog, stuffed with rice.”

“Nobody would kill and eat a dog,” Luba Luft said.
“They’re worth a fortune. But I guess it would be an imita¬
tion dog: ersatz. Right? But those are made of wires and
motors; they can’t be eaten.”

“Before the war,” he grated.

“I wasn’t alive before the war.”

“But you’ve seen old movies on TV.”

“Was the movie made in the Philippines?”

“Why?”

“Because,” Luba Luft said, “they used to eat boiled dog
stuffed with rice in the Philippines. I remember reading
that.”

“But your response,” he said. “I want your social, emo¬
tional, moral reaction.”


104


PHILIP K. DICK


“To the movie?” She pondered. “I’d turn it off and
watch Buster Friendly.”

“Why would you turn it off?”

“Well,” she said hotly, “who the hell wants to watch an
old movie set in the Philippines? What ever happened in
the Philippines except the Bataan Death March, and would
you want to watch that?” She glared at him indignantly.
On his dials the needles swung in all directions.

After a pause he said carefully, “You rent a mountain
cabin.”

Va. ” She nbdded. “Go on; I’m waiting.”

“In an area still verdant.”

“Pardon?” She cupped her ear. “I don’t ever hear that
term.”

“Still trees and bushes growing. The cabin is rustic
knotty pine with a huge fireplace. On the walls someone
has hung old maps, Currier and Ives prints, and above the
fireplace a deer’s head has been mounted, a full stag with
developed horns. The people with you admire the decor of
the cabin and—”

“I don’t understand ‘Currier’ or ‘Ives’ or ‘decor,’ ” Luba
Luft said; she seemed to be struggling, however, to make
out the terms. “Wait.” She held up her hand earnestly.
“With rice, like in the dog. Currier is what makes the rice
currier rice. It’s Curry in German.”

He could not fathom, for the life of him, if Luba Luffs
semantic fog had purpose. After consultation with himself
he decided to try another question; what else could he do?
“You’re dating a man,” he said, “and he asks you to visit
his apartment. While you’re there—”








DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


105


‘Vh nein, ” Luba broke in. “I wouldn’t be there. That’s
easy to answer.”

“That’s not the question!”

“Did you get the wrong question? But I understand that;
why is a question I understand the wrong one? Aren’t I
supposed to understand?” Nervously fluttering, she rubbed
her cheek—and detached the adhesive disk. It dropped to
the floor, skidded, and rolled under her dressing table.
^'Ach Gott, ” she muttered, bending to retrieve it. A ripping
sound, that of cloth tearing. Her elaborate costume.

“I’ll get it,” he said, and lifted her aside; he knelt down,
groped under the dressing table until his fingers located
the disk.

When he stood up he found himself looking into a la¬
ser tube. ,

“Your questions,” Luba Luft said in a crisp, formal voice,
“began to do wdth sex. I thought they would finally. You’re
not from the police department; you’re a sexual deviant.”

“You can look at my identification.” He reached toward
his coat pocket. His hand, he saw, had again begun to
shake, as it had with Polokov.

“If you reach in there,” Luba Luft said, “I’ll kill you.”

“You will anyhow.” He wondered how it would have
worked out if he had waited until Rachael Rosen could join
him. Well, no use dwelling on that.

“Let me see some more of your questions.” She held out
her hand and, reluctantly, he passed her the sheets. “ Tn
a magazine you come across a full-page color picture of a
nude girl.’ Well, that’s one. ‘You became pregnant by a
man who has promised to marry you. The man goes off


106


PHILIP K. DICK


with another woman, your best friend; you get an abor- |
tion.’ The pattern of your questioning is obvious. I’m going |

to call the police.” Still holding the laser tube in his direc- J

:(

tion, she crossed the room, picked up the vidphone, dialed s
the operator. “Connect me with the San Francisco Police !
Department,” she said. “I need a policeman.” |

“What you’re doing,” Rick said, with relief, “is the best
idea possible.” Yet it seemed strange to him that Luba had
decided to do this; why didn’t she simply kill him? Once
the patrolman arrived, her chance would disappear and it
all would go his way.

She must think she’s human, he decided. Obviously she
doesn’t know.

A few minutes later, during which Luba carefully kept
the laser tube on him, a large harness bull arrived in his
archaic blue uniform with gun and star. “All right,” he
said at once to Luba. “Put that thing away.” She set down
the laser tube and he picked it up to examine it, to see if it
carried a charge. “Now what’s been going on here?” he
asked her. Before she could answer, he turned to Rick.
“Who are you?” he demanded.

Luba Luft said, “He came into my dressing room; I’ve
never seen him before in my life. He pretended to be tak-

f

ing a poll or something and he wanted to ask me ques¬
tions; I thought it was all right and I said okay, and then he
began asking me obscene questions.” j

“Let’s see your identification,” the harness bull said to
Rick, his hand extended.

As he got out his ID Rick said, “I’m a bounty hunter with
the department.”

“I know all the bounty hunters,” the harness bull said








DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


107


as he examined Rick’s wallet. “With the S. F. Police De¬
partment?”

“My supervisor is Inspector Harry Bryant,” Rick said.
“I’ve taken over Dave Holden’s list, now that Dave’s in the
hospital.”

“As I say, 1 know all the bounty hunters,” the harness
bull said, “and I’ve never heard of you.” He handed Rick’s
ID back to him.

“Call Inspector Bryant,” Rick said.

“There isn’t any Inspector Bryant,” the harness bull said.

It came to Rick what was going on. “You’re an android,”
he said to the harness bull. “Like Miss Luft.” Going to the
vidphone, he picked up the receiver himself. “I’m going to
call the department.” He wondered how far he would get
before the two androids stopped him.

“The number,” the harness bull said, “is—”

“1 know the number.” Rick dialed, presently had the po¬
lice switchboard operator. “Let me talk to Inspector
Bryant,” he said.

“Who is calling, please?”

“This is Rick Deckard.” He stood waiting; meanwhile,
off to one side, the harness bull was getting a statement
from Luba Luft; neither paid any attention to him.

A pause and then Harry Bryant’s face appeared on the
vidscreen. “What’s doing?” he asked Rick.

“Some trouble,” Rick said. “One of those on Dave’s list
managed to call in and get a so-called patrolman out here.
I can’t seem to prove to him who 1 am; he says he knows
all the bounty hunters in the department and he’s never
heard of me.” He added, “He hasn’t heard of you either.”

Bryant said, “Let me talk to him.”


108


PHILIP K. DICK


“Inspector Bryant wants to talk to you.” Rick held out
the vidphone receiver. The harness bull ceased question¬
ing Miss Luft and came over to take it.

“Officer Crams,” the harness bull said briskly. A pause.
“Hello?” He listened, said hello several times more, waited,
then turned to Rick. “There’s nobody on the line. And no¬
body on the screen.” He pointed to the vidphone screen
and Rick saw nothing on it.

Taking the receiver from the harness bull, Rick said,
“Mr. Bryant?” He listened, waited; nothing. “I’ll dial again.”
He hung up, waited, then redialed the familiar number.
The phone rang, but no one answered it; the phone rang on
and on.

“Let me try,” Officer Crams said, taking the receiver
away from Rick. “You must have misdialed.” He dialed.
“The number is 842—”

“I know the number,” Rick said.

“Officer Crams calling in,” the harness bull said into the
phone receiver. “Is there an Inspector Bryant connected
with the department?” A short pause. “Well, what about a
bounty hunter named Rick Deckard?” Again a pause.
“You’re sure? Could he have recently—oh, I see; okay,
thanks. No, I have it under control.” Officer Crams rang
off, turned toward Rick.

“I had him on the line,” Rick said. “I talked to him; he
said he’d talk to you. It must be phone trouble; the connec¬
tion must have been broken somewhere along the way.
Didn’t you see—Bryant’s face showed on the screen and
then it didn’t.” He felt bewildered.

Officer Crams said, “I have Miss Luffs statement.







DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


109


Deckard. So let’s go down to the Hall of Justice so 1 can
book you.”

“Okay,” Rick said. To Luba Luft he said, “I’ll be back in
a short while. I’m still not finished testing you.”

“He’s a deviant,” Luba Luft said to Officer Crams. “He
gives me the creeps.” She shivered.

“What opera are you practicing to give?” Officer Crams
asked her.

"The Magic Flute, ” Rick said.

“1 didn’t ask you; I asked her.” The harness bull gave
him a glance of dislike.

“I’m anxious to get to the Hall of Justice,” Rick said.
“This matter should be straightened out.” He started
toward the door of the dressing room, his briefcase gripped.

“I’ll search you first.” Officer Crams deftly frisked him,
and came up with Rick’s service pistol and laser tube. He
appropriated both, after a moment of sniffing the muzzle
of the pistol. “This has been fired recently,” he said.

“I retired an andy just now,” Rick said. “The remains
are still in my car, up on the roof.”

“Okay,” Officer Crams said. “We’ll go up and have a
look.”

As the two of them started from the dressing room, Miss
Luft followed as far as the door. “He won’t come back
again, will he, officer? I’m really afraid of him; he’s so
strange.”

“If he’s got the body of someone he killed upstairs in his
car,” Crams said, “he won’t be coming back.” He nudged
Rick forward and, together, the two of them ascended by
elevator to the roof of the opera house.


110


PHILIP K. DICK


Opening the door of Rick’s car, Officer Crams silently in¬
spected the body of Polokov, |

“An android,” Rick said. “I was sent after him. He almost j
got me hy pretending to he—” I

“They’ll take your statement at the Hall of Justice,” Offi- I

j

cer Crams interrupted. He nudged Rick over to his parked,
plainly marked police car; there, by police radio, he put in
a call for someone to come pick up Polokov. “Okay,
Deckard,” he said then, ringing off. “Let’s get started.”

With the two of them aboard, the patrol car zummed up
from the roof and headed south.

Something, Rick noticed, was not as it should be. Officer
Crams had steered the car in the wrong direction.

“The Hall of Justice,” Rick said, “is north, on Lombard.”

“That’s the old Hall of Justice,” Officer Crams said. “The
new one is on Mission. That old building, it’s disintegrat¬
ing; it’s a ruin. Nobody’s used that for years. Has it been
that long since you last got booked?”

“Take me there,” Rick said. “To Lombard Street.” He
understood it all now; saw what the androids, working to- j
gether, had achieved. He would not live beyond this ride; I
for him it was the end, as it had almost been for Dave—
and probably eventually would be.

“That girl’s quite a looker,” Officer Crams said. “Of
course, with that costume you can’t tell about her figure.
But I’d say it’s damn okay.”

Rick said, “Admit to me that you’re an android.”

“Why? I’m not an android. What do you do, roam
around killing people and telling yourself they’re an¬
droids? I can see why Miss Luft was scared. It’s a good
thing for her that she called us.”









DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


111


“Then take me to the Hall of Justice, on Lombard.”

“Like 1 said—”

“I’ll take about three minutes,” Rick said. “1 want to see it.
Every morning 1 check in for work there; 1 want to see that
it’s been abandoned for years, as you say.”

“Maybe you’re an android,” Officer Crams said. “With a
false memory, like they give them. Had you thought of
that?” He grinned frigidly as he continued to drive south.

Conscious of his defeat and failure, Rick settled back.
And, helplessly, waited for what came next. Whatever the
androids had planned, now that they had physical posses¬
sion of him.

But 1 did get one of them, he told himself; 1 got Polokov.
And Dave got two.

Hovering over Mission, Officer Crams’s police car pre¬
pared to descend for its landing.


to


The Mission Street Hall of Justice building, onto the roof of
which the hovercar descended, jutted up in a series of
baroque, ornamented spires; complicated and modern,
the handsome structure struck Rick Deckard as attrac¬
tive—except for one aspect. He had never seen it before.

The police hovercar landed. And, a few minutes later,
he found himself being booked.

“304,” Officer Crams said to the sergeant at the high

4

desk. “And 612.4 and let’s see. Representing himself to be
a peace officer.”

“406.7,” the desk sergeant said, filling out the forms;
he wrote leisurely, in a slightly bored manner. Routine
business, his posture and expression declared. Nothing of
importance.

“Over here,” Officer Crams said to Rick, leading him to
a small white table at which a technician operated famil¬
iar equipment. “For your cephalic pattern,” Crams said.
“Ident-purposes.”

Rick said brusquely, “1 know.” In the old days, when he


112






DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


113


had been a harness bull himself, he had brought many
suspects to a table like this. Like this, but not this particu¬
lar table.

His cephalic pattern taken, he found himself being led
off to an equally familiar room; reflexively he began as¬
sembling his valuables for transfer. It makes no sense, he
said to himself. Who are these people? If this place has al¬
ways existed, why didn’t we know about it? And why don’t
they know about us? Two parallel police agencies, he said
to himself; ours and this one. But never coming in con¬
tact—as far as 1 know—until now. Or maybe they have, he
thought. Maybe this isn’t the first time. Hard to believe, he
thought, that this wouldn’t have happened long ago. If this
really is a police apparatus, here; if it’s what it asserts it¬
self to be.

A man, not in uniform, detached himself from the spot
at which he had been standing; he approached Rick
Deckard at a measured, unruffled pace, gazing at him cu¬
riously. “What’s this one?” he asked Officer Crams.

“Suspected homicide,” Crams answered. “We have a
body—we found it in his car—but he claims it’s an an¬
droid. We’re checking it out, giving it a bone marrow
analysis at the lab. And posing as a police officer, a bounty
hunter. To gain access to a woman’s dressing room in or¬
der to ask her suggestive questions. She doubted he was
what he said he was and called us in.” Stepping back.
Crams said, “Do you want to finish up with him, sir?”

“All right.” The senior police official, not in uniform,
blue-eyed, v^th a narrow, flaring nose and inexpressive
lips, eyed Rick, then reached for Rick’s briefcase. “What
do you have in here, Mr. Deckard?”


114


PHILIP K. DICK


Rick said, “Material pertaining to the Voigt-Kampff per¬
sonality test. 1 was testing a suspect when Officer Crams
arrested me.” He watched as the police official rummaged
through the contents of the briefcase, examining each
item. “The questions I asked Miss Luft are standard V-K
questions, printed on the—” |

“Do you know George Gleason and Phil Resch?” the po- |
lice official asked.

“No,” Rick said; neither name meant anything to him.

“They’re the bounty hunters for Northern California.
Both are attached to our department. Maybe you’ll run
into them while you’re here. Are you an android, Mr.
Deckard? The reason 1 ask is that several times in the past
we’ve had escaped andys turn up posing as out-of-state
bounty hunters here in pursuit of a suspect.”

Rick said, “I’m not an android. You can administer the
Voigt-Kampff test to me; I’ve taken it before and I don’t
mind taking it again. But I know what the results will be.
Can 1 phone my wife?”

“You’re allowed one call. Would you rather phone her
than a lawyer?”

“I’ll phone my wife,” Rick said. “She can get a lawyer
for me.”

The plainclothes police officer handed him a fifty-
cent piece and pointed. “There’s the vidphone over there.”

He watched as Rick crossed the room to the phone. Then
he returned to his examination of the contents of Rick’s
briefcase.

Inserting the coin, Rick dialed his home phone number.
And stood for what seemed like an eternity, waiting.






DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


115


A woman’s face appeared on the vidscreen. “Hello,”
she said.

It was not Iran. He had never seen the woman before in
his life.

He hung up, walked slowly back to the police officer.

“No luck?” the officer asked. “Well, you can make an¬
other call; we have a liberal policy in that regard. I can’t
offer you the opportunity of calling a bondsman because
your offense is unbailable, at present. When you’re ar¬
raigned, however—”

“I know,” Rick said acridly. “I’m familiar with police
procedure.”

“Here’s your briefcase,” the officer said; he handed it
back to Rick. “Come into my office ... I’d like to talk with
you further.” He started down a side hall, leading the way;
Rick followed. Then, pausing and turning, the officer said,
“My name is Garland.” He held out his hand and they
shook. Briefly. “Sit down,” Garland said as he opened his
office door and pushed behind a large uncluttered desk.

Rick seated himself facing the desk.

“This Voigt-Kampff test,” Garland said, “that you men¬
tioned.” He indicated Rick’s briefcase. “All that material
you carry.” He filled and lit a pipe, puffed for a moment.
“It’s an analytical tool for detecting andys?”

“It’s our basic test,” Rick said. “The only one we cur¬
rently employ. The only one capable of distinguishing the
new Nexus-6 brain unit. You haven’t heard of this test?”

“I’ve heard of several profile-analysis scales for use wdth
androids. But not that one.” He continued to study Rick in¬
tently, his face turgid; Rick could not fathom what Garland


116


PHILIP K. DICK


was thinking. “Those smudged carbon flimsies,” Garland
continued, “that you have there in yoiir briefcase. Polokov,
Miss Luft. . . your assignments. The next one is me.”

Rick stared at him, then grabbed for the briefcase.

In a moment the carbons lay spread out before him. Gar¬
land had told the truth; Rick examined the sheet. Neither
man—or rather neither he nor Garland—spoke for a time,
and then Garland cleared his throat, coughed nervously.

“It’s an unpleasant sensation,” he said. “To find yourself
a bounty hunter’s assignment all of a sudden. Or whatever
it is you are, Deckard.” He pressed a key on his desk inter¬
com and said, “Send one of the bounty hunters in here; I
don’t care which one. Okay; thank you.” He released the
key. “Phil Resch will be in here a minute or so from now,”
he said to Rick. “I want to see his list before I proceed.”

“You think I might be on his list?” Rick said.

“It’s possible. We’ll know pretty soon. Best to be sure
about these critical matters. Best not to leave it to chance.
This info sheet about me.” He indicated the smudged car¬
bon. “It doesn’t list me as a police inspector; it inaccu¬
rately gives my occupation as insurance underwriter.
Otherwise it’s correct, as to physical description, age, per¬
sonal habits, home address. Yes, it’s me, all right. Look
for yourself.” He pushed the page to Rick, who picked it
up and glanced over it.

The office door opened and a tall, fleshless man with
hard-etched features, wearing horn-rim glasses and a fuzzy
Vandyke beard, appeared. Garland rose, indicating Rick.

“Phil Resch, Rick Deckard. You’re both bounty hunters
and it’s probably time you met.”





DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


117


As he shook hands with Rick, Phil Resch said, “Which
city are you attached to?”

Garland answered for Rick. “San Francisco. Here; take
a look at his schedule. This one conies up next.” He
handed Phil Resch the sheet which Rick had been examin¬
ing, that with his own description.

“Say, Gar,” Phil Resch said. “This is you.”

“There’s more,” Garland said. “He’s also got Luba Luft
the opera singer there on his list of retirement-assignments,
and Polokov. Remember Polokov? He’s now dead; this
bounty hunter or android or whatever he is got him, and
we’re running a bone marrow test at the lab. To see if
there’s any conceivable basis—”

“Polokov I’ve talked to,” Phil Resch said. “That big
Santa Claus from the Soviet police?” He pondered, pluck¬
ing at his disarrayed beard. “I don’t think it’s a good idea
to run a bone marrow test on him.”

“Why do you say that?” Garland asked, clearly annoyed.
“It’s to remove any legal basis on which this man Deckard
could claim he hadn’t killed anyone; he only ‘retired an
android.’ ”

Phil Resch said, “Polokov struck me as cold. Extremely
cerebral and calculating; detached.”

“A lot of the Soviet police are that way,” Garland said,
visibly nettled.

“Luba Luft I never met,” Phil Resch said. “Although I’ve
heard records she’s made.” To Rick he said, “Did you test
her out?”

“I started to,” Rick said. “But I couldn’t get an accurate
reading. And she called in a harness bull, which ended it.”


118


PHILIP K. DICK


“And Polokov?” Phil Resch asked.

“I never got a chance to test him either.”

Phil Resch said, mostly to himself, “And I assume you
haven’t had an opportunity to test out Inspector Garland,
here.”

“Of course not,” Garland interjected, his face wrinkled
with indignation; his words broke off, bitter and sharp.

“What test do you use?” Phil Resch asked. ■

“The Voigt-Kampff scale.”

“Don’t know that particular one.” Both Resch and Gar¬
land seemed deep in rapid, professional thought—but not
in unison^ “I’ve always said,” he continued, “that the best
place for an android would be with a big police organiza¬
tion such as W.P.O. Ever since I first met Polokov I’ve
wanted to test him, but no pretext ever arose. It never
would have, either . . . which is one of the values such a
spot would have for an enterprising android.” |

Getting slowly to his feet. Inspector Garland faced Phil
Resch and said, “Have you wanted to test me, too?”

A discreet smile traveled across Phil Resch’s face; he !
started to answer, then shrugged. And remained silent. He I

i

did not seem afraid of his superior, despite Garland’s pal- '
pable wrath. i

“I don’t think you understand the situation,” Garland
said. “This man—or android—Rick Deckard, comes to us
from a phantom, hallucinatory, nonexistent police agency
allegedly operating out of the old departmental headquar¬
ters on Lombard. He’s never heard of us and we’ve never
heard of him—yet ostensibly we’re both working the same
side of the street. He employs a test we’ve never heard of.
The list he carries around isn’t of androids; it’s a list of hu-






DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


119


man beings. He’s already killed once—at least once. And if
Miss Luft hadn’t gotten to a phone, he probably would
have killed her and then eventually he would have come
sniffing around after me.”

“Hmm,” Phil Resch said.

“Hmm,” Garland mimicked, wrathfully. He looked, now,
as if he bordered on apoplexy. “Is that all you have to say?”

The intercom came on and a female voice said, “In¬
spector Garland, the lab report on Mr. Polokov’s corpse is
ready.”

“I think we should hear it,” Phil Resch said.

Garland glanced at him, seething. Then he bent, pressed
the key of the intercom. “Let’s have it. Miss French.”

“The bone marrow test,” Miss French said, “shows that
Mr. Polokov was a humanoid robot. Do you want a
detailed—”

“No, that’s enough.” Garland settled back in his seat,
grimly contemplating the far wall; he said nothing to ei¬
ther Rick or Phil Resch.

Resch said, “What is the basis of your Voigt-Kampff test,
Mr. Deckard?”

“Empathic response. In a variety of social situations.
Mostly having to do with animals.”

“Ours is probably simpler,” Resch said. “The reflex-arc
response taking place in the upper ganglia of the spinal col¬
umn requires several microseconds more in the humanoid
robot than in a human nervous system.” Reaching across
Inspector Garland’s desk, he plucked a pad of paper toward
him; with a ballpoint pen he drew a sketch. “We use an au¬
dio signal or a light-flash. The subject presses a button and
the elapsed time is measured. We try it a number of times.





120


PHILIP K. DICK


of course. Elapsed time varies in both the andy and the hu¬
man. But by the time ten reactions have been measured, we
believe we have a reliable clue. And, as in your case with
Polokov, the bone marrow test backs us up.”

An interval of silence passed and then Rick said, “You
can test me out. I’m ready. Of course I’d like to test you,
too. If you’re willing.”

“Naturally,” Resch said. He was, however, studying In¬
spector Garland. “I’ve said for years,” Resch murmured,
“that the Boneli Reflex-Arc Test should be applied rou¬
tinely to police personnel, the higher up the chain of com¬
mand, the better. Haven’t I, Inspector?”

“That’s right, you have,” Garland said. “And I’ve always
opposed it. On the grounds that it would lower department
morale.”

“I think now,” Rick said, “you’re going to have to sit still
for it. In view of your lab’s report on Polokov.”









tt


Garland said, “I guess so.” He jabbed a finger at the
bounty hunter Phil Resch. “But I’m warning you: you’re
not going to like the results of the tests.”

“Do you know what they’ll be?” Resch asked, with visi¬
ble surprise; he did not look pleased.

“1 know almost to a hair,” Inspector Garland said.

“Okay.” Resch nodded. “I’ll go upstairs and get the
Boneli gear.” He strode to the door of the office, opened it,
and disappeared out into the hall. “I’ll be back in three or
four minutes,” he said to Rick. The door shut after him.

Reaching into the right-hand top drawer of his desk. In¬
spector Garland fumbled about, then brought forth a laser
tube; he swiveled it until it pointed at Rick.

“That’s not going to make any difference,” Rick said.
“Resch will have a postmortem run on me, the same as
your lab ran on Polokov. And he’ll still insist on a—what did
you call it—Boneli Reflex-Arc Test on you and on himself.”

The laser tube remained in its position, and then In¬
spector Garland said, “It was a bad day all day. Especially


121


122


PHILIP K. DICK


when I saw Officer Crams bringing you in; I had an intu¬
ition—that’s why I intervened.” By degrees he lowered the
laser beam; he sat gripping it and then he shrugged and
returned it to the desk drawer, locking the drawer and
restoring the key to his pocket.

“What will tests on the three of us show?” Rick asked.

Garland said, “That damn fool Resch.”

“He actually doesn’t know?”

“He doesn’t know; he doesn’t suspect; he doesn’t have
the slightest idea. Otherwise he couldn’t live out a life as a
bounty hunter, a human occupation—hardly an android
occupation.” Garland gestured toward Rick’s briefcase.
“Those other carbons, the other suspects you’re supposed
to test and retire. 1 know them all.” He paused, then said,
“We all came here together on the same ship from Mars.
Not Resch; he stayed behind another week, receiving the
synthetic memory system.” He was silent then.

Or rather it was silent.

Rick said, “What’ll he do when he finds out?”

“1 don’t have the foggiest idea,” Garland said remotely.
“It ought, from an abstract, intellectual viewpoint, to be
interesting. He may kill me, kill himself; maybe you, too.
He may kill everyone he can, human and android alike. I
understand that such things happen, when there’s been a
synthetic memory system laid down. When one thinks it’s
human.”

“So when you do that, you’re taking a chance.”

Garland said, “It’s a chance anyway, breaking free and
coming here to Earth, where we’re not even considered
animals. Where every worm and wood louse is considered
more desirable than all of us put together.” Irritably, Gar-


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


123


land picked at his lower lip. “Your position would be bet¬
ter if Phil Resch could pass the Boneli test, if it was just
me. The results, that way, would be predictable; to Resch
I’d just be another andy to retire as soon as possible. So
you’re not in a good position either, Deckard. Almost as
bad, in fact, as 1 am. You know where I guessed wrong? 1
didn’t know about Polokov. He must have come here ear¬
lier; obviously he came here earlier. In another group en¬
tirely—no contact with ours. He was already entrenched
in the W.P.O. when 1 arrived. 1 took a chance on the lab re¬
port, which 1 shouldn’t have. Crams, of course, took the
same chance.”

“Polokov was almost my finish, too,” Rick said.

“Yes, there was something about him. I don’t think he
could have been the same brain unit type as we; he must
have been souped up or tinkered wdth—an altered struc¬
ture, unfamiliar even to us. A good one, too. Almost good
enough.”

“When 1 phoned my apartment,” Rick said, “why didn’t
I get my wife?”

“All our vidphone lines here are trapped. They recircu¬
late the call to other offices within the building. This is a
homeostatic enterprise we’re operating here, Deckard.
We’re a closed loop, cut off from the rest of San Francisco.
We know about them but they don’t know about us. Some¬
times an isolated person such as yourself wanders in here
or, as in your case, is brought here—for our protection.”
He gestured convulsively toward the office door. “Here
comes eager beaver Phil Resch back with his handy dandy
portable little test. Isn’t he clever? He’s going to destroy
his own life and mine and possibly yours.”



124


PHILIP K. DICK


“You androids,” Rick said, “don’t exactly cover for each
other in times of stress.”

Garland snapped, “1 think you’re right; it would seem
we lack a specific talent you humans possess. I believe it’s
called empathy.”

The office door opened; Phil Resch stood outlined, car¬
rying a device which trailed wires. “Here we are,” he said,
closing the door after him; he seated himself, plugging the
device into the electrical outlet.

Bringing out his right hand. Garland pointed at Resch.
At once Resch—and also Rick Deckard—rolled from their
chairs and onto the floor; at the same time, Resch yanked
a laser tube and, as he fell, fired at Garland.

The laser beam, aimed with skill, based on years of
training, bifurcated Inspector Garland’s head. He slumped
forward and, from his hand, his miniaturized laser beam
rolled across the surface of his desk. The corpse teetered
on its chair and then, like a sack of eggs, it slid to one side
and crashed to the floor.

“It forgot,” Resch said, rising to his feet, “that this is my
job. I can almost foretell what an android is going to do. I
suppose you can, too.” He put his laser beam away, bent,
and, with curiosity, examined the body of his quondam su¬
perior. “What did it say to you while I was gone?”

“That he—it—was an android. And you—” Rick broke
off, the conduits of his brain humming, calculating, and
selecting; he altered what he had started to say. “—would
detect it,” he finished. “In a few more minutes.”

“Anything else?”

“This building is android-infested.”

Resch said introspectively, “That’s going to make it



DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


125


hard for you and me to get out of here. Nominally 1 have
the authority to leave any time 1 want, of course. And to
take a prisoner wdth me.” He listened; no sound came
from beyond the office. “1 guess they didn’t hear anything.
There’s evidently no bug installed here, monitoring every¬
thing ... as there should be.” Gingerly, he nudged the
body of the android with the toe of his shoe. “It certainly is
remarkable, the psionic ability you develop in this busi¬
ness; I knew before I opened the office door that he would
take a shot at me. Frankly I’m surprised he didn’t kill you
while I was upstairs.”

“He almost did,” Rick said. “He had a big utility-model
laser beam on me part of the time. He was considering it.
But it was you he was worried about, not me.”

“The android flees,” Resch said humorlessly, “where
the bounty hunter pursues. You realize, don’t you, that
you’re going to have to double back to the opera house
and get Luba Luft before anyone here has a chance to
warn her as to how this came out. Warn it, I should say.
Do you think of them as ‘it’?”

“I did at one time,” Rick said. “When my conscience oc¬
casionally bothered me about the work I had to do; I pro¬
tected myself by thinking of them that way, but now I no
longer find it necessary. All right. I’ll head directly back to
the opera house. Assuming you can get me out of here.”

“Suppose we sit Garland up at his desk,” Resch said; he
dragged the corpse of the android back up into its chair,
arranging its arms and legs so that its posture appeared
reasonably natural—if no one looked closely. If no one
came into the office. Pressing a key on the desk intercom,
Phil Resch said, “Inspector Garland has asked that no calls


126


PHILIP K . DICK


be put through to him for the next half hour. He’s involved
in work that can’t be interrupted.”

“Yes, Mr. Resch.”

Releasing the intercom key, Phil Resch said to Rick,
“I’m going to handcuff you to me during the time we’re
still here in the building. Once we’re airborne I’ll naturally
let you go.” He produced a pair of cuffs, slapped one onto
Rick’s wrist and the other around his own. “Come on; let’s
get it over with.” He squared his shoulders, took a deep
breath, and pushed open the office door.

Uniformed police stood or sat on every side, conducting
their routine business of the day; none of them glanced up
or paid any attention as Phil Resch led Rick across the
lobby to the elevator.

“What I’m afraid of,” Resch said as they waited for the
elevator, “is that the Garland one had a dead man’s throt¬
tle warning component built into it. But—” He shrugged. “I
would have expected it to go off by now; otherwise it’s not
much good.”

The elevator arrived; several police-like nondescript
men and women disemelevatored, clacked off across the
lobby on their several errands. They paid no attention to
Rick or Phil Resch.

“Do you think your department will take me on?” Resch
asked as the elevator doors shut, closing the two of them
inside; he punched the roof button and the elevator
silently rose. “After all, as of now I’m out of a job. To say
the least.”

Guardedly, Rick said, “I—don’t see why not. Except that
we already have two bounty hunters.” I’ve got to tell him,
he said to himself. It’s unethical and cruel not to. Mr.


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


127


Resch, you’re an android, he thought to himself. You got
me out of this place and here’s your reward; you’re every¬
thing we jointly abominate. The essence of what we’re
committed to destroy.

“I can’t get over it,” Phil Resch said. “It doesn’t seem
possible. For three years I’ve been working under the di¬
rection of androids. Why didn’t I suspect—I mean, enough
to do something?”

“Maybe it isn’t that long. Maybe they only recently infil¬
trated this building.”

“They’ve been here all the time. Garland has been my
superior from the start, throughout my three years.”

“According to it,” Rick said, “the bunch of them came to
Earth together. And that wasn’t as long ago as three
years; it’s only been a matter of months.”

“Then at one time an authentic Garland existed,” Phil
Resch said. “And somewhere along the way got replaced.”
His sharklike lean face twisted and he struggled to under¬
stand. “Or—I’ve been impregnated with a false memory
system. Maybe I only remember Garland over the whole
time. But—” His face, suffused now with growing torment,
continued to twist and work spasmodically. “Only androids
show up wdth false memory systems; it’s been found inef¬
fective in humans.”

The elevator ceased rising; its doors slid back, and
there, spread out ahead of them, deserted except for
empty parked vehicles, lay the police station’s roof field.

“Here’s my car,” Phil Resch said, unlocking the door of a
nearby hover car and waving Rick rapidly inside; he himself
got in behind the wheel and started up the motor. In a mo¬
ment they had lifted into the sky and, turning north, headed


128


PHILIP K. DICK


back in the direction of the War Memorial Opera House.
Preoccupied, Phil Resch drove by reflex; his progressively
more gloomy train of thought continued to dominate his
attention. “Listen, Deckard,” he said suddenly. “After we
retire Luba Luft—1 want you to—” His voice, husky and tor¬
mented, broke off. “You know. Give me the Boneli test or
that empathy scale you have. To see about me.”

“We can worry about that later,” Rick said evasively.

“You don’t want me to take it, do you?” Phil Resch
glanced at him with acute comprehension. “1 guess you
know what the results will be; Garland must have told you
something. Facts which 1 don’t know.”

Rick said, “It’s going to be hard even for the two of us to
take out Luba Luft; she’s more than 1 could handle, any¬
how. Let’s keep our attention focused on that.”

“It’s not just false memory structures,” Phil Resch said.
“1 own an animal; not a false one but the real thing. A
squirrel. I love the squirrel, Deckard; every goddamn
morning 1 feed it and change its papers—you know, clean
up its cage—and then in the evening when 1 get off work I
let it loose in my apt and it runs all over the place. It has a
wheel in its cage; ever seen a squirrel running inside a
wheel? It runs and runs, the wheel spins, but the squirrel
stays in the same spot. Buffy seems to like it, though.”

“I guess squirrels aren’t too bright,” Rick said.

They flew on, then, in silence.


12


At the opera house Rick Deckard and Phil Resch were
informed that the rehearsal had ended. And Miss Luft
had left.

“Did she say where she intended to go?” Phil Resch
asked the stagehand, showing his police identification.

“Over to the museum.” The stagehand studied the ID
card. “She said she wanted to take in the exhibit of Edvard
Munch that’s there now. It ends tomorrow.”

And Luha Luft, Rick thought to himself, ends today.

As the two of them walked dovm the sidewalk to the
museum, Phil Resch said, “What odds will you give? She’s
flown; we won’t find her at the museum.”

“Mayhe,” Rick said.

They arrived at the museum building, noted on which
floor the Munch exhibit could be found, and ascended.
Shortly, they wandered amid paintings and woodcuts.
Many people had turned out for the exhibit, including a
grammar school class; the shrill voice of the teacher pene-


129


130


PHILIP K. DICK


trated all the rooms comprising the exhibit, and Rick
thought, That’s what you’d expect an andy to sound—and
look—like. Instead of like Rachael Rosen and Luba Luft.
And—the man beside him. Or rather the thing beside him.

“Did you ever hear of an andy having a pet of any sort?”
Phil Resch asked him.

For some obscure reason he felt the need to be brutally
honest; perhaps he had already begun preparing himself
for what lay ahead. “In two cases that 1 know of, andys
owned and cared for animals. But it’s rare. From what I’ve
been able to learn, it generally fails; the andy is unable to
keep the animal alive. Animals require an environment of
warmth to flourish. Except for reptiles and insects.”

“Would a squirrel need that? An atmosphere of love?
Because Buffy is doing fine, as sleek as an otter. 1 groom
and comb him every other day.” At an oil painting Phil
Resch halted, gazed intently. The painting showed a hair¬
less, oppressed creature with a head like an inverted pear,
its hands clapped in horror to its ears, its mouth open in a
vast, soundless scream. Twisted ripples of the creature’s
torment, echoes of its cry, flooded out into the air sur¬
rounding it; the man or woman, whichever it was, had be¬
come contained by its own howl. It had covered its ears
against its own sound. The creature stood on a bridge and
no one else was present; the creature screamed in isola¬
tion. Cut off by—or despite—its outcry.

“He did a woodcut of this,” Rick said, reading the card
tacked below the painting.

“1 think,” Phil Resch said, “that this is how an andy
must feel.” He traced in the air the convolutions, visible in



DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


131


the picture, of the creature’s cry. “I don’t feel like that, so
maybe I’m not an—” He broke off as several persons
strolled up to inspect the picture.

‘There*s Luba Luft ." Rick pointed and Phil Resch halted
his somber introspection and defense; the two of them
walked at a measured pace toward her, taking their time
as if nothing confronted them; as always, it was vital to
preserve the atmosphere of the commonplace. Other hu¬
mans, having no knowledge of the presence of androids
among them, had to be protected at all costs—even that of
losing the quarry.

Holding a printed catalogue, Luba Luft, wearing shiny
tapered pants and an illuminated gold vestlike top, stood
absorbed in the picture before her: a drawing of a young
girl, hands clasped together, seated on the edge of a bed,
an expression of bewildered wonder and new, groping
awe imprinted on the face 4

“Want me to buy it for you?” Rick said to Luba Luft; he
stood beside her, holding laxly onto her upper arm, in¬
forming her by his loose grip that he knew he had posses¬
sion of her—he did not have to strain in an effort to detain
her. On the other side of her Phil Resch put his hand on
her shoulder and Rick saw the bulge of the laser tube. Phil
Resch did not intend to take chances, not after the near
miss with Inspector Garland.

“It’s not for sale.” Luba Luft glanced at him idly, then vi¬
olently as. she recognized him; her eyes faded and the
color dimmed from her face, leaving it cadaverous, as if
already starting to decay. As if life had in an instant re¬
treated to some point far inside her, leaving the body to its



132


PHILIP K. DICK


automatic ruin. “I thought they arrested you. Do you mean
they let you ^o?”

“Miss Luft,” he said, “this is Mr. Resch. Phil Resch, this
is the quite well-known opera singer Luba Luft.” To Luba
he said, “The harness bull that arrested me is an android.
So was his superior. Do you know—did you know—an In¬
spector Garland? He told me that you all came here in one
ship as a group.”

“The police department which you called,” Phil Resch
said to her, “operating out of a building on Mission, is the
organizing agency by which it would appear your group
keeps in touch. They even feel confident enough to hire a
human bounty hunter; evidently—”

“You?” Luba Luft said. “You’re not human. No more
than I am: you’re an android, too.”

An interval of silence passed and then Phil Resch said in
a low but controlled voice, “Well, we’ll deal with that at the
proper time.” To Rick he said, “Let’s take her to my car.”

One of them on each side of her, they prodded her in the
direction of the museum elevator. Luba Luft did not come
willingly, but on the other hand she did not actively resist;
seemingly she had become resigned. Rick had seen that
before in androids, in crucial situations. The artificial life
force animating them seemed to fail if pressed too far . . .
at least in some of them. But not all.

And it could flare up again furiously.

Androids, however, had, as he knew, an innate desire to
remain inconspicuous. In the museum, with so many peo¬
ple roaming around, Luba Luft would tend to do nothing.
The real encounter—for her probably the final one—
would take place in the car, where no one else could see.



DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


133


Alone, with appalling abruptness, she could shed her inhi¬
bitions. He prepared himself—and did not think about Phil
Resch. As Resch had said, it would be dealt with at a
proper time.

At the end of the corridor near the elevators, a little

storelike affair had been set up; it sold prints and art

books, and Luba halted there, tarrying. “Listen,” she said

to Rick. Some of the color had returned to her face; once

*

more she looked—at least briefly—alive. “Buy me a repro¬
duction of that picture 1 was looking at when you found
me. The one of the girl sitting on the bed.”

After a pause Rick said to the clerk, a heavy-jowled,
middle-aged woman with netted gray hair, “Do you have a
print of Munch’s Puberty?''

“Only in this book of his collected work,” the clerk
said, lifting down a handsome glossy volume. “Twenty-
five dollars.”

“I’ll take it.” He reached for his wallet.

Phil Resch said, “My departmental budget could never
in a million years be stretched—”

“My own money,” Rick said; he handed the woman the
bills and Luba the book. “Now let’s get started down,” he
said to her and Phil Resch.

“It’s very nice of you,” Luba said as they entered the
elevator. “There’s something very strange and touching
about humans. An android would never have done that.”
She glanced icily at Phil Resch. “It wouldn’t have occurred
to him; as he said, never in a million years.” She continued
to gaze at Resch, now with manifold hostility and aversion.
“I really don’t like androids. Ever since I got here from
Mars my life has consisted of imitating the human, doing


134


PHILIP K. DICK


what she would do, acting as if I had the thoughts and im¬
pulses a human would have. Imitating, as far as I’m con¬
cerned, a superior life-form.” To Phil Resch she said, “Isn’t
that how it’s been with you, Resch? Trying to be—”

“I can’t take this.” Phil Resch dug into his coat, groped.

I

“No,” Rick said; he grabbed at Phil Resch’s hand; Resch
retreated, eluding him. “The Boneli test,” Rick said.

“It’s admitted it’s an android,” Phil Resch said. “We
don’t have to wait.”

“But to retire it,” Rick said, “because it’s needling you—
give me that.” He struggled to pry the laser tube away
from Phil Resch. The tube remained in Phil Resch’s pos¬
session; Resch circled back within the cramped elevator,
evading him, his attention on Luba Luft only. “Okay,” Rick
said. “Retire it; kill it now. Show it that it’s right.” He saw,
then, that Resch meant to. “Wait—”

Phil Resch fired, and at the same instant Luba Luft, in a
spasm of frantic hunted fear, twisted and spun away,
dropping as she did so. The beam missed its mark but, as
Resch lowered it, burrowed a narrow hole, silently, into
her stomach. She began to scream; she lay crouched
against the wall of the elevator, screaming. Like the pic¬
ture, Rick thought to himself, and, with his own laser tube,
killed her. Luba Luffs body fell forward, facedown, in a
heap. It did not even tremble.

With his laser tube, Rick systematically burned into
blurred ash the book of pictures which he had just a few
minutes ago bought Luba. He did the job thoroughly, say¬
ing nothing; Phil Resch watched without understanding,
his face showing his perplexity.



DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


135


“You could have kept the book yourself,” Resch said,
when it had been done. “That cost you—”

“Do you think androids have souls?” Rick interrupted.

Cocking his head on one side, Phil Resch gazed at him
in even greater puzzlement.

“1 could afford the book,” Rick said. “I’ve made three
thousand dollars so far today, and I’m not even half
through.”

“You’re claiming Garland?” Phil Resch asked. “But
I killed him, not you. You just lay there. And Luba, too. 1
got her.”

“You can’t collect,” Rick said. “Not from your own de¬
partment and not from ours. When we get to your car I’ll
administer the Boneli test or the Voigt-Kampff to you and
then we’ll see. Even though you’re not on my list.” His
hands shaking, he opened his briefcase, rummaged among
the crumpled onionskin carbons. “No, you’re not here. So
legally 1 can’t claim you; to make anything I’ll have to
claim Luba Luft and Garland.”

“You’re sure I’m an android? Is that really what Gar¬
land said?”

“That’s what Garland said.”

“Maybe he was lying,” Phil Resch said. “To split us apart.
As we are now. We’re nuts, letting them split us; you were
absolutely right about Luba Luft—I shouldn’t have let her
get my goat like that. I must be overly sensitive. That would
be natural for a bounty hunter, I suppose; you’re probably
the same way. But look; we would have had to retire Luba
Luft anyhow, half an hour from now—only one half hour
more. She wouldn’t even have had time to look through that


136


PHILIP K. DICK


book you got her. And I still think you shouldn’t have de¬
stroyed it; that’s a waste. 1 can’t follow your reasoning; it
isn’t rational, that’s why.”

Rick said, “I’m getting out of this business.”

“And go into what?”

“Anything. Insurance underwriting, like Garland was
supposed to be doing. Or I’ll emigrate. Yes.” He nodded.
“I’ll go to Mars.”

“But someone has to do this,” Phil Resch pointed out.

“They can use androids. Much better if andys do it. I
can’t anymore; I’ve had enough. She was a wonderful
singer. The planet could have used her. This is insane.”

“This is necessary. Remember: they killed humans in
order to get away. And if I hadn’t gotten you out of the
Mission police station, they would have killed you. That’s
what Garland wanted me for; that’s why he had me come
down to his office. Didn’t Polokov almost kill you? Didn’t
Luba Luft almost? We’re acting defensively; they’re here
on our planet—they’re murderous illegal aliens mas¬
querading as—”

“As police,” Rick said. “As bounty hunters.”

“Okay; give me the Boneli test. Maybe Garland lied. I
think he "did—false memories just aren’t that good. What
about my squirrel?”

“Yes, your squirrel. I forgot about your squirrel.”

“If I’m an andy,” Phil Resch said, “and you kill me, you
can have my squirrel. Here; I’ll write it out, willing it to you.”

“Andys can’t will anything. They can’t possess anything
to will.”

“Then just take it,” Phil Resch said.


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


137


“Maybe so,” Rick said. The elevator had reached the first
floor now; its doors opened. “You stay with Luba; I’ll get a
patrol car here to take her to the Hall of Justice. For her
bone marrow test.” He saw a phone booth, entered it,
dropped in a coin, and, his fingers shaking, dialed. Mean¬
while a group of people, who had been waiting for the eleva¬
tor, gathered around Phil Resch and the body of Luba Luft.

She was really a superb singer, he said to himself as he
hung up the receiver, his call completed. I don’t get it; how
can a talent like that be a liability to our society? But it
wasn’t the talent, he told himself; it was she herself. As
Phil Resch is, he thought. He’s a menace in exactly the
same way, for the same reasons. So I can’t quit now.
Emerging from the phone booth, he pushed his way
among the people, hack to Resch and the prone figure of
the android girl. Someone had put a coat over her. Not
Resch’s.

Going up to Phil Resch—who stood off to one side vigor¬
ously smoking a small gray cigar—he said to him, “I hope
to god you do test out as an android.”

“You really hate me,” Phil Resch said, marveling. “All of
a sudden; you didn’t hate me back on Mission Street. Not
while I was saving your life.”

“I see a pattern. The way you killed Garland and then
the way you killed Luba. You don’t kill the way I do; you
don’t try to—Hell,” he said. “I know what it is. You like to
kill. All you need is a pretext. If you had a pretext, you’d
kill me. That’s why you picked up on the possibility of Gar¬
land being an android; it made him available for being
killed. I wonder what you’re going to do when you fail to


138


PHILIP K. DICK


pass the Boneli test. Will you kill yourself? Sometimes an¬
droids do that.” But the situation was rare.

“Yes, ril take care of it,” Phil Resch said. “You won’t
have to do anything, besides administering the test.”

A patrol car arrived; two policemen hopped out, strode
up, saw the crowd of people and at once cleared them¬
selves a passage through. One of them recognized Rick
and nodded. So we can go now, Rick realized. Our busi¬
ness here is concluded. Finally.

As he and Resch walked back dovm the street to the
opera house, on whose roof their hovercar lay parked,
Resch said, “I’ll give you my laser tube now. So you won’t
have to worry about my reaction to the test. In terms of
your own personal safety.” He held out the tube and Rick
accepted it.

“How’ll you kill yourself without it?” Rick asked. “If you
fail the test?”

“I’ll hold my breath.”

“Chrissake,” Rick said. “It can’t be done.”

“There’s no automatic cut-in of the vagus nerve,” Phil
Resch said, “in an android. As there is in a human.
Weren’t you taught that when they trained you? I got
taught that years ago.”

“But to die that way,” Rick protested.

“There’s no pain. What’s the matter with it?”

“It’s—” He gestured. Unable to find the right words.

“I don’t really think I’m going to have to,” Phil Resch said.

Together they ascended to the roof of the War Memorial
Opera House and Phil Resch’s parked hovercar.

Sliding behind the wheel and closing his door, Phil
Resch said, “I would prefer it if you used the Boneli test.”


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


139


“I can’t. I don’t know how to score it.” I would have to
rely on you for an interpretation of the readings, he real¬
ized. And that’s out of the question.

“You’ll tell me the truth, won’t you?” Phil Resch asked.
“If I’m an android you’ll tell me?”

“Sure.”

“Because I really want to know. I have to know.” Phil
Resch relit his cigar, shifted about on the bucket seat of
the car, trying to make himself comfortable. Evidently he
could not. “Did you really like that Munch picture that
Luba Luft was looking at?” he asked. “I didn’t care for it.
Realism in art doesn’t interest me; I like Picasso and—”

''Puberty dates from 1894,” Rick said shortly. “Nothing
but realism existed then; you have to take that into ac¬
count.”

“But that other one, of the man holding his ears and
yelling—that wasn’t representational.”

Opening his briefcase, Rick fished out his test gear.

“Elaborate,” Phil Resch observed, watching. “How
many questions do you have to ask before you can make a
determination?”

“Six or seven.” He handed the adhesive pad to Phil
Resch. “Attach that to your cheek. Firmly. And this light—”
He aimed it. “This stays focused on your eye. Don’t move;
keep your eyeball as steady as you can.”

“Reflex fluctuations,” Phil Resch said acutely. “But not
to the physical stimulus; you’re not measuring dilation, for
instance. It’ll be to the verbal questions; what we call a
flinch reaction.”

Rick said, “Do you think you can control it?”

“Not really. Eventually, maybe. But not the initial ampli-


140


PHILIP K. DICK


tude; that’s outside conscious control. If it weren’t—” He
broke off. “Go ahead. I’m tense; excuse me if I talk too
much.”

“Talk all you want,” Rick said. Talk all the way to the
tomb, he said to himself. If you feel like it. It didn’t matter
to him.

“If I test out android,” Phil Resch prattled, “you’ll un¬
dergo renewed faith in the human race. But, since it’s not
going to work out that way, I suggest you begin framing an
ideology which will account for—”

“Here’s the first question,” Rick said; the gear had now
been set up and the needles of the two dials quivered. “Re¬
action time is a factor, so answer as rapidly as you can.”
From memory he selected an initial question. The test had
begun.

Afterward, Rick sat in silence for a time. Then he began
gathering his gear together, stuffing it back in the briefcase.

“I can tell by your face,” Phil Resch said; he exhaled in
absolute, weightless, almost convulsive relief. “Okay; you
can give me my gun back.” He reached out, his palm up,
waiting.

“Evidently you were right,” Rick said. “About Garland’s
motives. Wanting to split us up; what you said.” He felt
both psychologically and physically weary.

“Do you have your ideology framed?” Phil Resch asked.
“That would explain me as part of the human race?”

Rick said, “There is a defect in your empathic, role¬
taking ability. One which we don’t test for. Your feelings
toward androids.”

“Of course we don’t test for that.”


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


141


“Maybe we should.” He had never thought of it before,
had never felt any empathy on his ovm part toward the
androids he killed. Always he had assumed that through¬
out his psyche he experienced the android as a clever ma¬
chine—as in his conscious view. And yet, in contrast to
Phil Resch, a difference had manifested itself. And he felt
instinctively that he was right. Empathy toward an artifi¬
cial construct? he asked himself. Something that only pre¬
tends to be alive? But Luba Luft had seemed genuinely
alive; it had not worn the aspect of a simulation.

“You realize,” Phil Resch said quietly, “what this would
do. If we included androids in our range of empathic iden¬
tification, as we do animals.”

“We couldn’t protect ourselves.” /

“Absolutely. These Nexus-6 types . . . they’d roll all over
us and mash us flat. You and I, all the bounty hunters—we
stand between the Nexus-6 and mankind, a barrier which
keeps the two distinct. Furthermore—” He ceased, notic¬
ing that Rick was once again hauling out his test gear. “1
thought the test was over.”

“I want to ask myself a question,” Rick said. “And 1 want
you to tell me what the needles register. Just give me the
calibration; I can compute it.” He plastered the adhesive
disk against his cheek, arranged the beam of light until it
fed directly into his eye. “Are you ready? Watch the dials.
We’ll exclude time lapse in this; I just want magnitude.”

“Sure, Rick,” Phil Resch said obligingly.

Aloud, Rick said, “I’m going down by elevator with an
android I’ve captured. And suddenly someone kills it,
without warning.”

“No particular response,” Phil Resch said.



142


PHILIP K. DICK


“What’d the needles hit?”

“The left one 2.8. The right one 3.3.”

Rick said, “A female android.”

“Now they’re up to 4.0 and 6. respectively.”

“That’s high enough,” Rick said; he removed the wired
adhesive disk from his cheek and shut off the beam of
light. “That’s an emphatically empathic response,” he
said. “About what a human subject shows for most ques¬
tions. Except for the extreme ones, such as those dealing
with human pelts used decoratively . . . the truly patholog¬
ical ones.”

“Meaning?”

Rick said, “I’m capable of feeling empathy for at least
specific, certain androids. Not for all of them but—one or
two.” For Luba Luft, as an example, he said to himself. So
I was wrong. There’s nothing unnatural or unhuman
about Phil Resch’s reactions; it's me.

I wonder, he wondered, if any human has ever felt this
way before about an android.

Of course, he reflected, this may never come up again in
my work; it could be an anomaly, something for instance
to do with my feelings for The Magic Flute. And for Luba’s
voice, in fact her career as a whole. Certainly this had
never come up before; or at least not that he had been
aware of. Not, for example, with Polokov. Nor with Gar¬
land. And, he realized, if Phil Resch had proved out an¬
droid, I could have killed him without feeling anything,
anyhow after Luba’s death.

So much for the distinction between authentic living hu¬
mans and humanoid constructs. In that elevator at the


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


143


museum, he said to himself, I rode down with two crea¬
tures, one human, the other android . . . and my feelings
were the reverse of those intended. Of those I’m accus¬
tomed to feel—am required to feel.

“You’re in a spot, Deckard,” Phil Resch said; it seemed
to amuse him.

Rick said, “What—should I do?”

“It’s sex,” Phil Resch said.

“Sex?”

“Because she—it—was physically attractive. Hasn’t that
ever happened to you before?” Phil Resch laughed. “We
were taught that it constitutes a prime problem in bounty
hunting. Don’t you know, Deckard, that in the colonies
they have android mistresses?”

“It’s illegal,” Rick said, knowing the law about that.

“Sure it’s illegal. But most variations in sex are illegal.
But people do it anyhow.”

“What about—not sex—but love?”

“Love is another name for sex.”

“Like love of country,” Rick said. “Love of music.”

“If it’s love toward a woman or an android imitation,
it’s sex. Wake up and face yourself, Deckard. You wanted
to go to bed with a female type of android—nothing
more, nothing less. I felt that way, on one occasion. When
I had just started bounty hunting. Don’t let it get you
down; you’ll heal. What’s happened is that you’ve got
your order reversed. Don’t kill her—or be present when
she’s killed—and then feel physically attracted. Do it the
other way.”

Rick stared at him. “Go to bed with her first—”



144


PHILIP K. DICK


“—and then kill her,” Phil Resch said succinctly. His
grainy, hardened smile remained.

You’re a good bounty hunter, Rick realized. Your atti¬
tude proves it. But am I?

Suddenly, for the first time in his life, he had begun to
wonder.


/


13


Like an arc of pure fire, John R. Isidore soared across the
late-afternoon sky on his way home from his job. I wonder
if she’s still there, he said to himself. Down in that kipple-
infested old apt, watching Buster Friendly on her TV set
and quaking with fear every time she imagines someone
coming down the hall. Including, I suppose, me.

He had already stopped off at a blackmarket grocery
store. On the seat beside him, a bag of such delicacies as
bean curd, ripe peaches, good soft evil-smelling cheese
rocked back and forth as he alternately speeded up and
slowed down his car; being tense, tonight, he drove some¬
what erratically. And his allegedly repaired car coughed
and floundered, as it had been doing for months prior to
overhaul. Rats, Isidore said to himself.

The smell of peaches and cheese eddied about the car,
filling his nose wdth pleasure. All rarities, for which he had
squandered two weeks’ salary—borrowed in advance from
Mr. Sloat. And, in addition, under the car seat where it
could not roll and break, a bottle of Chablis wane knocked


145


146


PHILIP K . DICK


back and forth: the greatest rarity of all. He had been keep¬
ing it in a safety deposit box at the Bank of America, hang¬
ing onto it and not selling it no matter how much they
offered, in case at some long, late, last moment a girl ap¬
peared. That had not happened, not until now.

The rubbish-littered, lifeless roof of his apartment build¬
ing as always depressed him. Passing from his car to the
elevator door, he damped down his peripheral vision; he
concentrated on the valuable bag and bottle which he car¬
ried, making certain that he tripped over no trash and took
no ignominious pratfall to economic doom. When the ele¬
vator creakily arrived, he rode it—not to his own floor—but
to tbe lower level on which the new tenant, Pris Stratton,
now lived. Presently he stood in front of her door, rapping
with the edge of the wine bottle, his heart going to pieces
inside his chest.

“Who’s there?” Her voice, muffled by the door and yet
clear. A frightened, but blade-sharp tone.

“This is J. R. Isidore speaking,” he said briskly, adopting
the new authority which he had so recently acquired via
Mr. Sloat’s vidphone. “I have a few desirable items here
and I think we can put together a more than reasonable
dinner.”

The door, to a limited extent, opened; Pris, no lights on
in the room behind her, peered out into the dim hall. “You
sound different,” she said. “More grown up.”

“I had a few routine matters to deal with during busi¬
ness hours today. The usual. If you c-c-could let me in—”

“You’d talk about them.” However, she held the door
open wide enough for him to enter. And then, seeing what
he carried, she exclaimed; her face ignited with elfin, exu-





DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


147


berant glee. But almost at once, without warning, a lethal
bitterness crossed her features, set concrete-like in place.
The glee had gone.

“What is it?” he said; he carried the packages and bottle
to the kitchen, set them down and hurried back.

Tonelessly, Pris said, “They’re wasted on me.”

“Why?”

“Oh . . .” She shrugged, walking aimlessly away, her
hands in the pockets of her heavy, rather old-fashioned
skirt. “Sometime I’ll tell you.” She raised her eyes then. “It
was nice of you anyhow. Now I wish you’d leave. I don’t
feel like seeing anyone.” In a vague fashion she moved
toward the door to the hall; her steps dragged and she
seemed depleted, her store of energy fading almost out.

“I know what’s the matter with you,” he said.

“Oh?” Her voice, as she reopened the hall door,
dropped even further into uselessness, listless and barren.

“You don’t have any friends. You’re a lot worse than
when I saw you this morning; it’s because—”

“I have friends.” Sudden authority stiffened her voice;
she palpably regained vigor. “Or I had. Seven of them.
That was to start with, but now the bounty hunters have
had time to get to work. So some of them—maybe all of
them—are dead.” She wandered toward the window,
gazed out at the blackness and the few lights here and
there. “I may be the only one of the eight of us left. So
maybe you’re right.”

“What’s a bounty hunter?”

“That’s right. You people aren’t supposed to know. A
bounty hunter is a professional murderer who’s given a list
of those he’s supposed to kill. He’s paid a sum—a thousand


148


PHILIP K. DICK


dollars is the going rate, 1 understand—for each he gets.
Usually he has a contract with a city so he draws a salary
as well. But they keep that low so he’ll have incentive.”

“Are you sure?” Isidore asked.

“Yes.” She nodded. “You mean am I sure he has incen¬
tive? Yes, he has incentive. He enjoys it.”

“I think,” Isidore said, “you’re mistaken.” Never in his
life had he heard of such a thing. Buster Friendly, for in¬
stance, had never mentioned it. “It’s not in accord vsdth
present-day Mercerian ethics,” he pointed out. “All life is
one; ‘no man is an island,’ as Shakespeare said in olden
times.”

“John Donne.”

Isidore gestured in agitation. “That’s worse than any¬
thing I ever heard of. Can’t you call the police?”

“No.”

“And they’re after you? They’re apt to come here and
kill you?'' He understood, now, why the girl acted in so se¬
cretive a fashion. “No wonder you’re scared and don’t
want to see anybody.” But he thought. It must be a delu¬
sion. She must be psychotic. With delusions of persecution.
Maybe from brain damage due to the dust; maybe she’s a
special. “I’ll get them first,” he said.

“With what?” Faintly, she smiled; she showed her

f

small, even, white teeth.

“I’ll get a license to carry a laser beam. It’s easy to get,
out here where there’s hardly anybody; the police don’t
patrol—you’re expected to watch out for yourself.”

“How about when you’re at work?”

“I’ll take a leave of absence!”

Pris said, “That’s very nice of you, J. R. Isidore. But if




DO ANDR0 IDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


149


bounty hunters got the others, got Max Polokov and Gar¬
land and Luba and Masking and Roy Baty—” She broke
off. “Roy and Irmgard Baty. If they’re dead, then it really
doesn’t matter. They’re my best friends. Why the hell
don’t I hear from them, I wonder?” She cursed angrily.

Making his way into the kitchen, he got down dusty,
long unused plates and bowls and glasses; he began wash¬
ing them in the sink, running the rusty hot water until it
cleared at last. Presently Pris appeared, seated herself at
the table. He uncorked the bottle of Chablis, divided the
peaches and the cheese and the bean curd.

“What’s that white stuff? Not the cheese.” She pointed.

“Made from soy bean whey. I wish I had some—” He
broke off, flushing. “It used to be eaten with beef gravy.”

“An android,” Pris murmured. “That’s the sort of slip an
android makes. That’s what gives it away.” She came
over, stood beside him, and then to his stunned surprise
put her arm around his waist and for an instant pressed
against him. “I’ll try a slice of peach,” she said, and gin¬
gerly picked out a slippery pink-orange furry slice with
her long fingers. And then, as she ate the slice of peach,
she began to cry. Cold tears descended her cheeks,
splashed on the bosom of her dress. He did not know what
to do, so he continued dividing the food. “Goddamn it,” she
said furiously. “Well—” She moved away from him, paced
slowly, with measured steps, about the room. “—see, we
lived on Mars. That’s how come I know androids.” Her
voice shook but she managed to continue; obviously it
meant a great deal to her to have someone to talk to.

“And the only people on Earth that you know,” Isidore
said, “are your fellow ex-emigrants.”


150


PHILIP K. DICK


“We knew each other before the trip. A settlement near
New New York. Roy Baty and Irmgard ran a drugstore; he
was a pharmacist and she handled the beauty aids, the
creams and ointments; on Mars they use a lot of skin con¬
ditioners. 1—” She hesitated. “1 got various drugs from
Roy—1 needed them at first because—well, anyhow, it’s an
awful place. This”—she swept in the room, the apartment,
in one violent gesture—“this is nothing. You think I’m suf¬
fering because I’m lonely. Hell, all Mars is lonely. Much
worse than this.”

“Don’t the androids keep you company? I heard a com¬
mercial on—” Seating himself, he ate, and presently she,
too, picked up the glass of wine; she sipped expression¬
lessly. “I understood that the androids helped.”

“The androids,” she said, “are lonely, too.”

“Do you like the wine?”

She set down her glass. “It’s fine.”

“It’s the only bottle I’ve seen in three years.”

“We came back,” Pris said, “because nobody should
have to live there. It wasn’t conceived for habitation, at
least not within the last billion years. It’s so old. You feel it
in the stones, the terrible old age. Anyhow, at first I got
drugs from Roy; I lived for that new synthetic painkiller,
that silenizine. And then I met Horst Hartman, who at that
time ran a stamp store, rare postage stamps; there’s so
much time on your hands that you’ve got to have a hobby,
something you can pore over endlessly. And Horst got me
interested in pre-colonial fiction.”

“You mean old books?”

“Stories written before space travel but about space
travel.”



DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


151


“How could there have been stories about space travel
before—”

“The writers,” Pris said, “made it up.”

“Based on what?”

“On imagination. A lot of times they turned out wrong.
For example they wrote about Venus being a jungle par¬
adise with huge monsters and women in breastplates that
glistened.” She eyed him. “Does that interest you? Big
women with long, braided blond hair and gleaming breast¬
plates the size of melons?”

“No,” he said.

“Irmgard is blond,” Pris said. “But small. Anyhow,
there’s a fortune to be made in smuggling pre-colonial fic¬
tion, the old magazines and books and films, to Mars.
Nothing is as exciting. To read about cities and huge in¬
dustrial enterprises, and really successful colonization. *
You can imagine what it might have been like. What Mars
ought to be like. Canals.”

“Canals?” Dimly, he remembered reading about that; in
the olden days they had believed in canals on Mars.

“Crisscrossing the planet,” Pris said. “And beings from
other stars. With infinite wisdom. And stories about Earth,
set in our time and even later. Where there’s no radioac¬
tive dust.”

“1 would think,” Isidore said, “it would make you feel
worse.”

“It doesn’t,” Pris said curtly.

“Did you bring any of that pre-colonial reading mate¬
rial back with you?” It occurred to him that he ought to
try some.

“It’s worthless here, because here on Earth the craze



152


PHILIP K. DICK


never caught on. Anyho^v there’s plenty here, in the li¬
braries; that’s where we get all of ours—stolen from li¬
braries here on Earth and shot by autorocket to Mars.
You’re out at night bumbling across the open space, and all
of a sudden you see a flare, and there’s a rocket, cracked
open, with old pre-colonial fiction magazines spilling out
everywhere. A fortune. But of course you read them before
you sell them.” She warmed to her topic. “Of all—”

A knock sounded on the hall door.

Ashen, Pris whispered, “1 can’t go. Don’t make any
noise; just sit.” She strained, listening. “1 wonder if the
door’s locked,” she said almost inaudibly. “God, 1 hope so.”
Her eyes, wild and powerful, fixed themselves beseech¬
ingly on him, as if praying to him to make it true.

A far-off voice from the hall called, “Pris, are you in
there?” A man’s voice. “It’s Roy and Irmgard. We got your
card.”

Rising and going into the bedroom, Pris reappeared
carrying a pen and scrap of paper; she reseated herself,
scratched out a hasty message.

YOU GO TO THE DOOR.

Isidore, nervously, took the pen from her and wrote:

AND SAY WHAT?

With anger, Pris scratched out:

SEE IE ITS REALLY THEM.

Getting up, he walked glumly into the living room. How
would 1 know if it was them? he inquired of himself. He
opened the door.

Two people stood in the dim hall, a small woman, lovely
in the manner of Greta Garbo, with blue eyes and yellow-
blond hair; the man larger, with intelligent eyes but flat.





DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


153


Mongolian features which gave him a brutal look. The
woman wore a fashionable wrap, high shiny boots, and ta¬
pered pants; the man lounged in a rumpled shirt and
stained trousers, giving an air of almost deliberate vulgar¬
ity. He smiled at Isidore but his bright, small eyes re¬
mained oblique.

“We’re looking—” the small blond woman began, but
then she saw past Isidore; her face dissolved in rapture
and she whisked past him, calling, “Pris! How are you?”
Isidore turned. The two women were embracing. He
stepped aside, and Roy Baty entered, somber and large,
smiling his crooked, tuneless smile.


I

ta


“Can we talk?” Roy said, indicating Isidore.

Pris, vibrant with bliss, said, “It’s okay up to a point.” To
Isidore she said, “Excuse us.” She led the Batys off to one
side and muttered at them; then the three of them returned
to confront J. R. Isidore, who felt uncomfortable and out of
place. “This is Mr. Isidore,” Pris said. “He’s taking care of
me.” The words came out tinged with an almost malicious
sarcasm; Isidore blinked. “See? He brought me some nat¬
ural food.”

“Food,” Irmgard Baty echoed, and trotted lithely into
the kitchen to see. “Peaches,” she said, immediately pick¬
ing up a bowl and spoon; smiling at Isidore, she ate with
brisk little animal bites. Her smile, different from Pris’s,
provided simple warmth; it had no veiled overtones.

Going after her—he felt attracted to her—Isidore said,
“You’re from Mars.”

“Yes, we gave up.” Her voice bobbed, as, with birdish
acumen, her blue eyes sparkled at him. “What an awful


154





DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


155


building you live in. Nobody else lives here, do they? We
didn’t see any other lights.”

“1 live upstairs,” Isidore said.

“Oh, 1 thought you and Pris were maybe living to¬
gether.” Irmgard Baty did not sound disapproving; she
meant it, obviously, as merely a statement.

Dourly—but still smiling his smile—Roy Baty said,
“Well, they got Polokov.”

The joy which had appeared on Pris’s face at seeing her
friends at once melted away. “Who else?”

“They got Garland,” Roy Baty said. “They got Anders
and Gitchel and then just a little earlier today they got
Luba.” He delivered the news as if, perversely, it pleased
him to be telling this. As if he derived pleasure from Pris’s
shock. “1 didn’t think they’d get Luba; remember 1 kept
saying that during the trip?”

“So that leaves—” Pris said.

“The three of us,” Irmgard said with apprehensive
urgency.

“That’s why we’re here.” Roy Baty’s voice boomed out
with new, unexpected warmth; the worse the situation,
the more he seemed to enjoy it. Isidore could not fathom
him in the slightest.

“Oh god,” Pris said, stricken.

“Well, they had this investigator, this bounty hunter,”
Irmgard said in agitation, “named Dave Holden.” Her lips
dripped venom at the name. “And then Polokov almost
got him.”

'"Almost got him,” Roy echoed, his smile now immense.

“So he’s in this hospital, this Holden,” Irmgard contin-




156


PHILIP K. DICK


ued. “And evidently they gave his list to another bounty
hunter, and Polokov almost got him, too. But it wound up
with him retiring Polokov. And then he went after Luba;
we know that because she managed to get hold of Garland
and he sent out someone to capture the bounty hunter and
take him to the Mission Street building. See, Luba called
us after Garland’s agent picked up the bounty hunter. She
was sure it would be okay; she was sure that Garland
would kill him.” She added, “But evidently something went
wrong on Mission. We don’t know what. Maybe we never
will.”

Pris asked, “Does this bounty hunter have our names?”

“Oh yes, dear, 1 suppose he does,” Irmgard said. “But he
doesn’t know where we are. Roy and 1 aren’t going back to
our apartment; we have as much stuff in our car as we
could cram in, and we’ve decided to take one of these
abandoned apartments in this ratty old building.”

“Is that wise?” Isidore spoke up, summoning courage.
“T-T-To all be in one place?”

“Well, they got everybody else,” Irmgard said, matter-
of-factly; she, too, like her husband, seemed strangely re¬
signed, despite her superficial agitation. All of them,
Isidore thought; they’re all strange. He sensed it wdthout
being able to finger it. As if a peculiar and malign ab~
stractness pervaded their mental processes. Except, per¬
haps, for Pris; certainly she was radically frightened. Pris
seemed almost right, almost natural. But—

“Why don’t you move in with him?” Roy said to Pris, in¬
dicating Isidore. “He could give you a certain amount of
protection.”




DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


157


“A chickenhead?” Pris said. “I’m not going to live with a
chickenhead.” Her nostrils flared.

Irmgard said rapidly, “I think you’re foolish to he a snob
at a time like this. Bounty hunters move fast; he may try to
tie it up this evening. There may be a bonus in it for him if
he got it done by—”

“Keerist, close the hall door,” Roy said, going over to it;
he slammed it with one blow of his hand, thereupon sum¬
marily locking it. “I think you should move in with Isidore,
Pris, and I think Irm and I should be here in the same
building; that way we can help each other. I’ve got some
electronic components in my car, junk I ripped off the
ship. I’ll install a two-way bug so Pris, you can hear us and
we can hear you, and I’ll rig up an alarm system that any
of the four of us can set off. It’s obvious that the synthetic
identities didn’t work out, even Garland’s. Of course. Gar¬
land put his head in the noose by bringing the bounty
hunter to the Mission Street building; that was a mistake.
And Polokov, instead of staying as far away as possible
from the hunter, chose to approach him. We won’t do that;
we’ll stay put.” He did not sound worried in the slightest;
the situation seemed to rouse him to crackling near-manic
energy. “I think—” He sucked in his breath noisily, holding
the attention of everyone else in the room, including
Isidore. “/ think that there’s a reason why the three of us
are still alive. I think if he had any clue as to where we
are, he’d have shown up here by now. The whole idea in
bounty hunting is to work as fast as hell. That’s where the
profit comes.”

“And if he waits,” Irmgard said in agreement, “we slip


158


PHILIP K. DICK


away, like we’ve done. I bet Roy is right; I bet he has our
names but no location. Poor Luba; stuck in the War Memo¬
rial Opera House, right out in the open. No difficulty find¬
ing her.”

“Well,” Roy said stiltedly, “she wanted it that way; she
believed she’d be safer as a public figure.”

“You told her otherwise,” Irmgard said.

“Yes,” Roy agreed, “1 told her, and 1 told Polokov not to
try to pass himself off as a W.P.O. man. And 1 told Garland
that one of his own bounty hunters would get him, which
is very possibly, just conceivably, exactly what did hap¬
pen.” He rocked back and forth on his heavy heels, his
face wise with profundity.

Isidore spoke up. “1-1-1 gather from 1-1-listening to Mr.
Baty that he’s your n-n-natural leader.”

“Oh yes, Roy’s a leader,” Irmgard said.

Pris said, “He organized our—trip. From Mars to here.”

“Then,” Isidore said, “you better do what h-h-he sug¬
gests.” His voice broke with hope and tension. “I think it
would be t-t-terrific, Pris, if you 1-1-lived with me. I’ll stay
home a couple of days from my job—I have a vacation
coming. To make sure you’re okay.” And maybe Milt, wbo
was very inventive, could design a weapon for him to use.
Something imaginative, which would slay bounty hunters
. . , whatever they were. He had an indistinct, glimpsed
darkly impression; of something merciless that carried a
printed list and a gun, that moved machine-like through
the flat, bureaucratic job of killing. A thing wdthout emo¬
tions, or even a face; a thing that if killed got replaced im¬
mediately by another resembling it. And so on, until
everyone real and alive had been shot.




DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


159


Incredible, he thought, that the police can’t do anything.
I can’t believe that. These people must have done some¬
thing. Perhaps they emigrated back to Earth illegally.
We’re told—the TV tells us—to report any landing of a
ship outside the approved pads. The police must be watch¬
ing for this.

But even so, no one got killed deliberately anymore. It
ran contrary to Mercerism.

“The chickenhead,” Pris said, “likes me.”

“Don’t call him that, Pris,” Irmgard said; she gave Isidore
a look of compassion. “Think what he could call you’'

Pris said nothing. Her expression became enigmatic.

“I’ll go start rigging up the bug,” Roy said. “Irmgard
and I’ll stay in this apartment; Pris you go with—Mr.
Isidore.” He started toward the door, striding with amaz¬
ing speed for a man so heavy. In a blur he disappeared out
the door, which banged back as he flung it open. Isidore,
then, had a momentary, strange hallucination; he saw
briefly a frame of metal, a platform of pullies and circuits
and batteries and turrets and gears—and then the
slovenly shape of Roy Baty faded back into view. Isidore
felt a laugh rise up inside him; he nervously choked it off.
And felt bewildered.

“A man,” Pris said distantly, “of action. Too bad he’s so
poor wdth his hands, doing mechanical things.”

“If we get saved,” Irmgard said in a scolding, severe
tone, as if chiding her, “it’ll be because of Roy.”

“But it is worth it,” Pris said, mostly to herself. She
shrugged, then nodded to Isidore. “Okay, J. R. I’ll move in
with you and you can protect me.”

“A-A-All of you,” Isidore said immediately.


160


PHILIP K. DICK


Solemnly, in a formal little voice, Irmgard Baty said to
him, “1 want you to know we appreciate it very much, Mr.
Isidore. You’re the first friend 1 think any of us have found
here on Earth. It’s very nice of you and maybe sometime
we can repay you.” She glided over to pat him on the arm.

“Do you have any pre-colonial fiction 1 could read?” he
asked her.

“Pardon?” Irmgard Baty glanced inquiringly at Pris.

“Those old magazines,” Pris said; she had gathered a
few things together to take with her, and Isidore lifted the
bundle from her arms, feeling the glow that comes only
from satisfaction at a goal achieved. “No, J. R. We didn’t
bring any back with us, for reasons I explained.”

“I’ll g-g-go to a library tomorrow,” he said, going out
into the hall. “And g-g-get you and me, too, some to read,
so you’ll have something to do besides just waiting.”

He led Pris upstairs to his own apartment, dark and empty
and stuffy and lukewarm as it was; carrying her posses¬
sions into the bedroom, he at once turned on the heater,
lights, and the TV to its sole channel.

“I like this,” Pris said, but in the same detached and re¬
mote tone as before. She meandered about, hands thrust
in her skirt pockets; on her face a sour expression, almost
righteous in the degree of its displeasure, appeared. In
contrast to her stated reaction.

“What’s the matter?” he asked as he laid her posses¬
sions out on the couch.

“Nothing.” She halted at the picture window, drew the
drapes back, and gazed morosely out.

“If you think they’re looking for you—” he began.





DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


161


“It’s a dream,” Pris said. “Induced by drugs that Roy
gave me.”

“P-Pardon?”

“You really think that bounty hunters exist?”

“Mr. Baty said they killed your friends.”

“Roy Baty is as crazy as I am,” Pris said. “Our trip was be¬
tween a mental hospital on the East Coast and here. We’re
all schizophrenic, with defective emotional lives—flattening
of affect, it’s called. And we have group hallucinations.”

“I didn’t think it was true,” he said, full of relief.

“Why didn’t you?” She swiveled to stare intently at him;
her scrutiny was so strict that he felt himself flushing.

“B-B-Because things like that don’t happen. The g-g-
government never kills anyone, for any crime. And
Mercerism—”

“But you see,” Pris said, “if you’re not human, then it’s
all different.”

“That’s not true. Even animals—even eels and gophers
and snakes and spiders—are sacred.”

Pris, still regarding him fixedly, said, “So it can’t be,
can it? As you say, even animals are protected by law. All
life. Everything organic that wriggles or squirms or bur¬
rows or flies or swarms or lays eggs or—” She broke off,
because Roy Baty had appeared, abruptly throwing the
door of the apartment open and entering; a trail of wire
rustled after him.

“Insects,” he said, showing no embarrassment at over¬
hearing them, “are especially sacrosanct.” Lifting a pic¬
ture from the wall of the living room, he attached a small
electronic device to the nail, stepped back, viewed it, then
replaced the picture. “Now the alarm.” He gathered up the




162


PHILIP K. DICK


trailing wire, which led to a complex assembly. Smiling his j
discordant smile, he showed the assembly to Pris and John |
Isidore. “The alarm. These wires go under the carpet; j
they’re antennae. It picks up the presence of a—” He hesi- j
tated. “A mentational entity,” he said obscurely, “which
isn’t one of us four.”

“So it rings,” Pris said, “and then what? He’ll have a
gun. We can’t fall on him and bite him to death.”

“This assembly,” Roy continued, “has a Penfield unit
built into it. When the alarm has been triggered, it radi¬
ates a mood of panic to the—intruder. Unless he acts very
fast, which he may. Enormous panic; I have the gain
turned all the way up. No human being can remain in the
vicinity more than a matter of seconds. That’s the nature
of panic: it leads to random circus-motions, purposeless
flight, and muscle and neural spasms.” He concluded,
“Which will give us an opportunity to get him. Possibly.
Depending on how good he is.” |

Isidore said, “Won’t the alarm affect us?”

“That’s right,” Pris said to Roy Baty. “It’ll affect
Isidore.”

“Well, so what,” Roy said. And resumed his task of in¬
stallation. “So they both go racing out of here panic-
stricken. It’ll still give us time to react. And they won’t kill
Isidore; he’s not on their list. That’s why he’s usable as a
cover.”

Pris said brusquely, “You can’t do any better, Roy?”

“No,” he answered. “I can’t.”

“I’ll be able to g-g-get a weapon tomorrow,” Isidore
spoke up.





DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


163


“You’re sure Isidore’s presence here won’t set off the
alarm?” Pris said. “After all, he’s—you know.”

“I’ve compensated for his cephalic emanations,” Roy ex¬
plained. “Their sum won’t trip anything; it’ll take an addi¬
tional human. Person.” Scowling, he glanced at Isidore,
aware of what he had said.

“You’re androids,” Isidore said. But he didn’t care; it
made no difference to him. “I see why they want to kill
you,” he said. “Actually you’re not alive.” Everything made
sense to him now. The bounty hunter, the killing of their

i

friends, the trip to Earth, all these precautions.

“When I used the word ‘human,’ ” Roy Baty said to Pris,

I “I used the wrong word.”

“That’s right, Mr. Baty,” Isidore said. “But what does it

i

I matter to me? I mean. I’m a special; they don’t treat me
very well either, like for instance I can’t emigrate.” He
found himself yabbering away like a folletto. “You can’t
come here; I can’t—” He calmed himself.

After a pause Roy Baty said laconically, “You wouldn’t
enjoy Mars. You’re missing nothing.”

“I wondered how long it would be,” Pris said to Isidore,
“before you realized. We are different, aren’t we?”

“That’s what probably tripped up Garland and Max
Polokov,” Roy Baty said. “They were so goddamn sure
they could pass. Luba, too.”

“You’re intellectual,” Isidore said; he felt excited again
at having understood. Excitement and pride. “You think
abstractly, and you don’t—” He gesticulated, his words
tangling up wdth one another. As usual. “I wish I had an IQ
like you have; then I could pass the test, I wouldn’t be a





164


PHILIP K. DICK


chickenhead. I think you’re very superior; I could learn a
lot from you.” i

After an interval Roy Baty said, “I’ll finish wiring up the i
alarm.” He resumed work. j

“He doesn’t understand yet,” Pris said in a sharp, brit¬
tle, stentorian voice, “how we got off Mars. What we did j
there.”

“What we couldn’t help doing,” Roy Baty grunted.

At the open door to the hall Irmgard Baty had been
standing; they noticed her as she spoke up. “1 don’t think
we have to worry about Mr. Isidore,” she said earnestly;
she walked swiftly toward him, looked up into his face.
“They don’t treat him very well either, as he said. And
what we did on Mars he isn’t interested in; he knows us
and he likes us and an emotional acceptance like that—it’s
everything to him. It’s hard for us to grasp that, but it’s
true.” To Isidore she said, standing very close to him once
again and peering up at him, “You could get a lot of money
by turning us in; do you realize that?” Twisting, she said to
her husband, “See, he realizes that but still he wouldn’t
say anything.”

“You’re a great man, Isidore,” Pris said. “You’re a
credit to your race.”

“If he was an android,” Roy said heartily, “he’d turn us
in about ten tomorrow morning. He’d take off for his job
and that would be it. I’m overwhelmed with admiration.”
His tone could not be deciphered; at least Isidore could not
crack it. “And we imagined this would be a friendless
world, a planet of hostile faces, all turned against us.” He
barked out a laugh.

“I’m not at all worried,” Irmgard said.






\


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP? 165

“You ought to be scared to the soles of your feet,”
Roy said.

“Let’s vote,” Pris said. “As we did on the ship, when we
had a disagreement.”

“Well,” Irmgard said, “I won’t say anything more. But if
we turn this down, 1 don’t think we’ll find any other hu¬
man being who’ll take us in and help us. Mr. Isidore is—”
She searched for the word.

“Special,” Pris said.




ts


Solemnly, and with ceremony, the vote was taken.

“We stay here,” Irmgard said, with firmness. “In this
apartment, in this building.”

Roy Baty said, “1 vote we kill Mr. Isidore and hide some¬
where else.” He and his wife—and John Isidore—now
turned tautly toward Pris.

In a low voice Pris said, “1 vote we make our stand
here.” She added, more loudly, “1 think J. R.’s value to us
outweighs his danger, that of his knowing. Obviously we
can’t live among humans without being discovered; that’s
what killed Polokov and Garland and Luba and Anders.
That’s what killed all of them.”

“Maybe they did just what we’re doing,” Roy Baty said.
“Confided in, trusted, one given human being who they be¬
lieved was different. As you said, special.”

“We don’t know that,” Irmgard said. “That’s only a con¬
jecture. 1 think they, they—” She gestured. “Walked around.
Sang from a stage like Luba. We trust—I’ll tell you what we
trust that fouls us up, Roy; it’s our goddamn superior intelli-


166








DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


167


gence!” She glared at her husband, her small, high breasts
I rising and falhng rapidly. “We’re so smart —Roy, you’re do¬
ing it right now; goddamn you, you’re doing it nowV'

Pris said, “1 think Irm’s right.”

“So we hang our lives on a substandard, blighted—” Roy
began, then gave up. “I’m tired,” he said simply. “It’s been
a long trip, Isidore. But not very long here. Unfortunately.”
“1 hope,” Isidore said happily, “I can help make your

I stay here on Earth pleasant.” He felt sure he could. It
seemed to him a cinch, the culmination of his whole life—
and of the new authority which he had manifested on the
vidphone today at work.

As soon as he officially quit work that evening, Rick Deck-
ard flew across town to animal row: the several blocks of
big-time animal dealers vdth their huge glass windows
and lurid signs. The new and horribly unique depression
which had floored him earlier in the day had not left. This,

' his activity here with animals and animal dealers, seemed
the only weak spot in the shroud of depression, a flaw by
which he might be able to grab it and exorcise it. In the
past, anyhow, the sight of animals, the scent of money
deals with expensive stakes, had done much for him.
Maybe it would accomplish as much now.

“Yes, sir,” a nattily dressed new animal salesman said
to him chattily as he stood gaping wdth a sort of glazed,
meek need at the displays. “See anything you like?”

Rick said, “I see a lot I like. It’s the cost that both¬
ers me.”

“You tell us the deal you want to make,” the salesman
said. “What you want to take home with you and how you


















168


PHILIP K. DICK


want to pay for it. We’ll take the package to our sales
manager and get his hig okay.”

“I’ve got three thou cash.” The department, at the end
of the day, had paid him his bounty. “How much,” he
asked, “is that family of rabbits over there?”

“Sir, if you have a down payment of three thou, 1 can
make you owner of something a lot better than a pair of
rabbits. What about a goat?”

“1 haven’t thought much about goats,” Rick said.

“May 1 ask if this represents a new price bracket for
you?”

“Well, 1 don’t usually carry around three thou,” Rick
conceded.

“1 thought as much, sir, when you mentioned rabbits.
The thing about rabbits, sir, is that everybody has one. I’d
like to see you step up to the goat-class where 1 feel you
belong. Frankly you look more like a goat man to me.”

“What are the advantages to goats?”

The animal salesman said, “The distinct advantage of a
goat is that it can be taught to butt anyone who tries to
steal it.”

“Not if they shoot it with a hypno-dart and descend by
rope ladder from a hovering hovercar,” Rick said.

The salesman, undaunted, continued, “A goat is loyal.
And it has a free, natural soul which no cage can chain
up. And there is one exceptional additional feature about
goats, one which you may not be aware of. Often times when
you invest in an animal and take it home, you find, some
morning, that it’s eaten something radioactive and died.
A goat isn’t bothered by contaminated quasi-foodstuffs; it





DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


169


I can eat eclectically, even items that would fell a cow or a

n

horse or most especially a cat. As a long term investment we
feel that the goat—especially the female—offers unbeatable
advantages to the serious animal-owner.”

“Is this goat a female?” He had noticed a big black goat
standing squarely in the center of its cage; he moved that
way and the salesman accompanied him. The goat, it
seemed to Rick, was beautiful.

“Yes, this goat is a female. A black Nubian goat, very
large, as you can see. This is a superb contender in this
year’s market, sir. And we’re offering her at an attractive,
unusually low, low price.”

i Getting out his creased Sidney’s, Rick looked up the list¬
ings on goats, black Nubian.

“Will this be a cash deal?” the salesman asked. “Or are
you trading in a used animal?”

“All cash,” Rick said.

i

On a slip of paper the salesman scribbled a price and
then briefly, almost furtively, showed it to Rick.

: “Too much,” Rick said. He took the slip of paper and

wrote down a more modest figure.

:! “We couldn’t let a goat go for that,” the salesman
protested. He wrote another figure. “This goat is less than
a year old; she has a very long life expectancy.” He

' showed the figure to Rick.

“It’s a deal,” Rick said.

' He signed the time-payment contract, paid over his
three thousand dollars—his entire bounty money—as
down payment, and shortly found himself standing by his

I hovercar, rather dazed, as employees of the animal dealer






170


PHILIP K. DICK


loaded the crate of goat into the car. I own an animal now, I
he said to himself. A living animal, not electric. For the j
second time in my life. j

The expense, the contractual indebtedness, appalled j
him; he found himself shaking. But 1 had to do it, he said j
to himself. The experience with Phil Resch—1 have to get
my confidence, my faith in myself and my abilities, back, r
Or 1 won’t keep my job. |

His hands numb, he guided the hovercar up into the sky ji
and headed for his apartment and Iran. She’ll be angry, he ;

I

said to himself. Because it’ll worry her, the responsibility.
And since she’s home all day, a lot of the maintenance will
fall to her. Again he felt dismal.

When he had landed on the roof of his building, he sat j
for a time, weaving together in his mind a story thick with
verisimilitude. My job requires it, he thought, scraping
bottom. Prestige. We couldn’t go on with the electric sheep
any longer; it sapped my morale. Maybe 1 can tell her that,
he decided.

Climbing from the car, he maneuvered the goat cage
from the back seat, with wheezing effort managed to set it
down on the roof. The goat, which had slid about during
the transfer, regarded him wdth bright-eyed perspicacity,
but made no sound.

He descended to his floor, followed a familiar path
down the hall to his own door. |

“Hi,” Iran greeted him, busy in the kitchen with dinner.
“Why so late tonight?”

“Come up to the roof,” he said. “1 want to show you
something.”

"You bought an animal/’ She removed her apron.






DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP? 171

smoothed back her hair reflexively, and followed him out
of the apartment; they progressed down the hall with
huge, eager strides. “You shouldn’t have gotten it without
me,” Iran gasped. “I have a right to participate in the deci¬
sion, the most important acquisition we’ll ever—”

“I wanted it to be a surprise,” he said.

“You made some bounty money today,” Iran said
accusingly.

Rick said, “Yes, I retired three andys.” He entered the •
elevator and together they moved nearer to god. “I had to
buy this,” he said. “Something went wrong today; some¬
thing about retiring them. It wouldn’t have been possible
for me to go on without getting an animal.” The elevator
had reached the roof; he led his wife out into the evening
darkness, to the cage; switching on the spotlights—main¬
tained for the use of all building residents—he pointed to
the goat, silently. Waiting for her reaction.

“Oh my god,” Iran said softly. She walked to the cage,
peered in; then she circled around it, viewing the goat
from every angle. “Is it really real?” she asked. “It’s not
false?”

“Absolutely real,” he said. “Unless they swindled me.”
But that rarely happened; the fine for counterfeiting would
be enormous: two and a half times the full market value of
the genuine animal. “No, they didn’t swindle me.”

“It’s a goat,” Iran said. “A black Nubian goat.”

“Female,” Rick said. “So maybe later on we can mate
her. And we’ll get milk out of which we can make cheese.”

“Can we let her out? Put her where the sheep is?”

“She ought to be tethered,” he said. “For a few days at


least.”


172


PHILIP K. DICK


Iran said in an odd little voice, “ ‘My life is love and
pleasure.’ An old, old song by Josef Strauss. Remember?
When we first met.” She put her hand gently on his shoul¬
der, leaned toward him and kissed him. “Much love. And
very much pleasure.”

“Thanks,” he said, and hugged her.

“Let’s run downstairs and give thanks to Mercer. Then
we can come up here again and right away name her; she
needs a name. And maybe you can find some rope to
tether her.” She started off.

Standing by his horse Judy, grooming and currying her,
their neighbor Bill Barbour called to them, “Hey, that’s a
nice-looking goat you have, Deckards. Congratulations.
Evening, Mrs. Deckard. Maybe you’ll have kids; I’ll maybe
trade you my colt for a couple of kids.”

“Thanks,” Rick said. He followed after Iran, in the di¬
rection of the elevator. “Does this cure your depression?”
he asked her. “It cures mine.”

Iran said, “It certainly does cure my depression. Now
we can admit to everybody that the sheep’s false.”

“No need to do that,” he said cautiously.

“But we ca«,” Iran persisted. “See, now we have noth¬
ing to hide; what we’ve always wanted has come true. It’s
a dream!” Once more she stood on tiptoe, leaning and
nimbly kissing him; her breath, eager and erratic, tickled
his neck. She reached, then, to stab at the elevator button.

Something warned him. Something made him say, “Let’s
not go down to the apartment yet. Let’s stay up here with
the goat. Let’s just sit and look at her and maybe feed the
goat something. They gave me a bag of oats to start us out.
And we can read the manual on goat maintenance; they in-



DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


173


eluded that, too, at no extra charge. We can call her Eu-
phemia.” The elevator, however, had come, and already
Iran was trotting inside. “Iran, wait,” he said.

“It would he immoral not to fuse with Mercer in grati¬
tude,” Iran said. “I had hold of the handles of the box to¬
day and it overcame my depression a little—just a little,
not like this. But anyhow I got hit by a rock, here.” She
held up her wrist; on it he made out a small dark bruise.
“And I remember thinking how much better we are, how
much better off, when we’re with Mercer. Despite the
pain. Physical pain but spiritually together; I felt everyone
else, all over the world, all who had fused at the same
time.” She held the elevator door from sliding shut. “Get
in, Rick. This’ll be just for a moment. You hardly ever un¬
dergo fusion; I want you to transmit the mood you’re in
now to everyone else; you owe it to them. It would be im¬
moral to keep it for ourselves.”

She was, of course, right. So he entered the elevator
and once again descended.

In their living room, at the empathy box, Iran swiftly
snapped the switch, her face animated with growing glad¬
ness; it lit her up like a rising new crescent of moon. “I
want everyone to know,” she'told him. “Once that hap¬
pened to me; I fused and picked up someone who had just
acquired an animal. And then one day—” Her features
momentarily darkened; the pleasure fled. “One day I
found myself receiving from someone whose animal had
died. But others of us shared our different joys with
them—I didn’t have any, as you might know—and that
cheered the person up. We might even reach a potential
suicide; what we have, what we’re feeling, might—”



174


PHILIP K. DICK


“They’ll have our joy,” Rick said, Tbut we’ll lose. We’ll ex¬
change what we feel for what they feel. Our joy will be lost.”

The screen of the empathy box now showed rushing
streams of bright formless color; taking a breath, his wife
hung on tightly to the two handles. “We won’t really lose
what we feel, not if we keep it clearly in mind. You never
really have gotten the hang of fusion, have you, Rick?”

“Guess not,” he said. But now he had begun to sense,
for the first time, the value that people such as Iran ob¬
tained from Mercerism. Possibly his experience wdth the
bounty hunter Phil Resch had altered some minute syn¬
apsis in him, had closed one neurological swdtch and
opened another. And this perhaps had started a chain re¬
action. “Iran,” he said urgently; he drew her away from
the empathy box. “Listen; I want to talk about what hap¬
pened to me today.” He led her over to the couch, sat her
down facing him. “I met another bounty hunter,” he said.
“One I never saw before. A predatory one who seemed to
like to destroy them. For the first time, after being with
him, I looked at them differently. I mean, in my own way I
had been viewing them as he did.”

“Won’t this wait?” Iran said.

Rick said, “I took a test, one question, and verified it;
I’ve begun to empathize with androids, and look what that
means. You said it this morning yourself. ‘Those poor
andys.’ So you know what I’m talking about. That’s why I
bought the goat. I never felt like that before. Maybe it
could be a depression, like you get. I can understand now
how you suffer when you’re depressed; I always thought
you liked it and I thought you could have snapped yourself





DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


175


out any time, if not alone, then by means of the mood or¬
gan. But when you get that depressed you don’t care. Apa¬
thy, because you’ve lost a sense of worth. It doesn’t matter
whether you feel better, because if you have no worth—”

“What about your job?” Her tone jabbed at him; he
blinked. “Your 706 ,” Iran repeated. “What are the monthly
payments on the goat?” She held out her hand; reflexively
he got out the contract which he had signed, passed it to
her. “That much,” she said in a thin voice. “The interest;
good god—the interest alone. And you did this because
you were depressed. Not as a surprise for me, as you orig¬
inally said.” She handed the contract back to him. “Well, it
doesn’t matter. I’m still glad you got the goat; I love the
goat. But it’s such an economic burden.” She looked gray.

Rick said, “I can get switched to some other desk. The
department does ten or eleven separate jobs. Animal theft;
I could transfer to that.”

“But the bounty money. We need it or they’ll repossess
the goat!”

“I’ll get the contract extended from thirty-six months to
forty-eight.” He whipped out a ballpoint pen, scribbled
rapidly on the back of the contract. “That way it’ll be fifty-
two fifty less a month.”

The vidphone rang.

“If we hadn’t come back down here,” Rick said, “if we’d
stayed up on the roof, with the goat, we wouldn’t have got¬
ten this call.”

Going to the vidphone, Iran said, “Why are you afraid?
They’re not repossessing the goat, not yet.” She started to
lift the receiver.







176


PHILIP K. DICK


“It’s the department,” he said. “Say I’m not here.” He
headed for the bedroom.

“Hello,” Iran said, into the receiver.

Three more andys, Rick thought to himself, that I
should have followed up on today, instead of coming
home. On the vidscreen Harry Bryant’s face had formed,
so it was too late to get away. He walked, with stiff leg
muscles, back toward the phone.

“Yes, he’s here,” Iran was saying. “We bought a goat.
Come over and see it, Mr. Bryant.” A pause as she listened
and then she held the receiver up to Rick. “He has some¬
thing he wants to say to you,” she said. Going over to the
empathy box, she quickly seated herself and once more
gripped the twin handles. She became involved almost at
once. Rick stood holding the phone receiver, conscious of
her mental departure. Conscious of his own aloneness.

“Hello,” he said into the receiver.

“We have a tail on two of the remaining androids,”
Harry Bryant said. He was calling from his office; Rick saw
the familiar desk, the litter of documents and papers and
kipple. “Obviously they’ve become alerted—they’ve left the
address Dave gave you and now they can be found at . . .
wait.” Bryant groped about on his desk, at last located the
material he wanted.

Automatically Rick searched for his pen; he held the
goat-payment contract on his knee and prepared to vsrite.

“Conapt Building 3967-C,” Inspector Bryant said. “Get
over there as soon as you can. We have to assume they
know about the ones you picked off. Garland and Luft and'
Polokov; that’s why they’ve taken unlawful flight.”

“Unlawful,” Rick repeated. To save their lives.


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


177


“Iran says you bought a goat,” Bryant said. “Just today?
After you left work?”

“On my way home.”

“I’ll come and look at your goat after you retire the re¬
maining androids. By the way—I talked to Dave just now. I
told him the trouble they gave you; he says congratula¬
tions and be more careful. He says the Nexus-6 types are
smarter than he thought. In fact he couldn’t believe you
got three in one day.”

“Three is enough,” Rick said. “I can’t do anything more.
I have to rest.”

“By tomorrow they’ll be gone,” Inspector Bryant said.
“Out of our jurisdiction.”

“Not that soon. They’ll still be around.”

Bryant said, “You get over there tonight. Before they get
dug in. They won’t expect you to move in so fast.”

“Sure they will,” Rick said. “They’ll be waiting for me.”

“Got the shakes? Because of what Polokov—”

“I haven’t got the shakes,” Rick said.

“Then what’s wrong?”

“Okay,” Rick said. “I’ll get over there.” He started to
hang up the phone.

“Let me know as soon as you get results. I’ll be here in
my office.”

Rick said, “If I get them I’m going to buy a sheep.”

“You have a sheep. You’ve had one as long as I’ve
known you.” x

“It’s electric,” Rick said. He hung up. A real sheep this
time, he said to himself. I have to get one. In compensation.

At the black empathy box his wdfe crouched, her face
rapt. He stood beside her for a time, his hand resting on


178


PHILIP K. DICK


her breast; he felt it rise and fall, the life in her, the activ¬
ity. Iran did not notice him; the experience with Mercer
had, as always, become complete.

On the screen the faint, old, robed figure of Mercer
toiled upward, and all at once a rock sailed past him.
Watching, Rick thought. My god; there’s something worse
about my situation than his. Mercer doesn’t have to do
anything alien to him. He suffers but at least he isn’t re¬
quired to violate his own identity.

Bending, he gently removed his wife’s fingers from the
twin handles. He then himself took her place. For the first
time in weeks. An impulse: he hadn’t planned it; all at
‘ once it had happened.

A landscape of weeds confronted him, a desolation. The
air smelled of harsh blossoms; this was the desert, and
there was no rain.

A man stood before him, a sorrowful light in his weary,
pain-drenched eyes.

“Mercer,” Rick said.

“I am your friend,” the old man said. “But you must go
on as if I did not exist. Can you understand that?” He
spread empty hands.

“No,” Rick said. “1 can’t understand that. I need help.”

“How can 1 save you,” the old man said, “if 1 can’t save
myself?” He smiled. “Don’t you see? There is no salvation.''

“Then what’s this for?” Rick demanded. “What are
you for?”

“To show you,” Wilbur Mercer said, “that you aren’t
alone. 1 am here with you and always will be. Go and do
your task, even though you know it’s wrong.”


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


179


“Why?” Rick said. “Why should I do it? I’ll quit my job
and emigrate.”

The old man said, “You will be required to do wrong no
matter where you go. It is the basic condition of life, to be
required to violate your own identity. At some time, every
creature which lives must do so. It is the ultimate shadow,
the defeat of creation; this is the curse at work, the curse
that feeds on all life. Everywhere in the universe.”

“That’s all you can tell me?” Rick said.

A rock whizzed at him; he ducked and the rock struck
him on the ear. At once he let go of the handles and again
he stood in his ovm living room, beside his wife and the
empathy box. His head ached wildly from the blow; reach¬
ing, he found fresh blood collecting, spilling in huge bright
drops down the side of his face.

Iran, with a handkerchief, patted his ear. “I guess I’m
glad you pried me loose. I really can’t stand it, being hit.
Thanks for taking the rock in my place.”

“I’m going,” Rick said.

“The job?”

“Three jobs.” He took the handkerchief from her and
went to the hall door, still dizzy and, now, feeling nausea.

“Good luck,” Iran said.

“I didn’t get anything from holding onto those handles,”
Rick said. “Mercer talked to me but it didn’t help. He doesn’t
know any more than I do. He’s just an old man climbing
a hill to his death.”

“Isn’t that the revelation?”

Rick said, “I have that revelation already.” He opened
the hall door. “I’ll see you later.” Stepping out into the


180


PHILIP K. DICK


hall, he shut the door after him. Conapt 3967-C, he re¬
flected, reading it off the back of the contract. That’s out in
the suburbs; it’s mostly abandoned there. A good place to
hide. Except for the lights at night. That’s what I’ll be go¬
ing by, he thought. The lights. Phototropic, like the death’s
head moth. And then after this, he thought, there won’t be
any more. I’ll do something else, earn my living another
way. These three are the last. Mercer is right; I have to get
this over with. But, he thought, I don’t think I can. Two
andys together—this isn’t a moral question, it’s a practical
question.

I probably cant retire them, he realized. Even if I try;
I’m too tired and too much has happened today. Maybe
Mercer knew this, he reflected. Maybe he foresaw every¬
thing that will happen.

But I know where I can get help, offered to me before
but declined.

He reached the roof and a moment later sat in the dark¬
ness of his hovercar, dialing.

“Rosen Association,” the answering-service girl said.

“Rachael Rosen,” he said.

“Pardon, sir?”

Rick grated, “Get me Rachael Rosen.”

“Is Miss Rosen expecting—”

“I’m sure she is,” he said. He waited.

Ten minutes later Rachael Rosen’s small dark face ap¬
peared on the vidscreen. “Hello, Mr. Deckard.”

“Are you busy right now or can I talk to you?” he said.
“As you said earlier today.” It did not seem like today; a
generation had risen and declined since he had talked to


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


181


her last. And all the weight, all the weariness of it, had re¬
capitulated itself in his body; he felt the physical burden.
Perhaps, he thought, because of the rock. With the hand¬
kerchief he dabbed at his still-bleeding ear.

“Your ear is cut,” Rachael said. “What a shame.”

Rick said, “Did you really think 1 wouldn’t call you? As
you said?”

“1 told you,” Rachael said, “that without me one of the
Nexus-6s would get you before you got it.”

“You were wrong.”

“But you are calling. Anyhow. Do you want me to come
down there to San Francisco?”

“Tonight,” he said.

“Oh, it’s too late. I’ll come tomorrow; it’s an hour trip.”

“1 have been told 1 have to get them tonight.” He paused
and then said, “Out of the original eight, three are left.”

“You sound like you’ve had a just awful time.”

“If you don’t fly down here tonight,” he said, “I’ll go af¬
ter them alone and 1 won’t be able to retire them. 1 just
bought a goat,” he added. “With the bounty money from
the three 1 did get.”

“You humans.” Rachael laughed. “Goats smell terrible.”

“Only male goats. 1 read it in the book of instructions
that came with it.”

“You really are tired,” Rachael said. “You look dazed.
Are you sure you know what you’re doing, trying for three
more Nexus-6s the same day? No one has ever retired six
androids in one day.”

“Franklin Powers,” Rick said. “About a year ago, in Chi¬
cago. He retired seven.”


182


PHILIP K. DICK


“The obsolete McMillan Y-4 variety,” Rachael said.
“This is something else.” She pondered. “Rick, 1 can’t do it.
I haven’t even had dinner.”

“1 need you,” he said. Otherwise I’m going to die, he
said to himself. I know it; Mercer knew it; I think you know
it, too. And I’m wasting my time appealing to you, he re¬
flected. An android can’t be appealed to; there’s nothing in
there to reach.

Rachael said, “I’m sorry, Rick, but I can’t do it tonight.
It’ll have to be tomorrow.”

“Android vengeance,” Rick said.

“What?”

“Because I tripped you up on the Voigt-Kampff scale.”

“Do you think that?” Wide-eyed, she said, “Really?”

“Good-bye,” he said, and started to hang up.

“Listen,” Rachael said rapidly. “You’re not using your
head.”

“It seems that way to you because you Nexus-6 types
are cleverer than humans.”

“No, I really don’t understand,” Rachael sighed. “I can
tell that you don’t want to do this job tonight—maybe not
at all. Are you sure you want me to make it possible for
you to retire the three remaining androids? Or do you
want me to persuade you not to try?”

“Come down here,” he said, “and we’ll rent a hotel
room.”

“Why?”

“Something I heard today,” he said hoarsely. “About sit¬
uations involving human men and android women. Come
down here to San Francisco tonight and I’ll give up on the
remaining andys. We’ll do something else.”




DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


183


She eyed him, then abruptly said, “Okay, I’ll fly down.
Where should I meet you?”

“At the St. Francis. It’s the only halfway decent hotel
still in operation in the Bay Area.”

“And you won’t do anything until I get there.”

“I’ll sit in the hotel room,” he said, “and watch Buster
Friendly on TV. His guest for the last three days has been
Amanda Werner. I like her; I could watch her the rest of
my life. She has breasts that smile.” He hung up then and
sat for a time, his mind vacant. At last the cold of the car
roused him; he switched on the ignition key and a moment
later headed in the direction of downtown San Francisco.
And the St. Francis Hotel.


16



In the sumptuous and enormous hotel room Rick Deckard
sat reading the typed carhon sheets on the two androids
Roy and Irmgard Baty. In these two cases telescopic snap¬
shots had been included, fuzzy 3-D color prints which he
could barely make out. The woman, he decided, looks at¬
tractive. Roy Baty, however, is something different. Some¬
thing worse.

A pharmacist on Mars, he read. Or at least the android
had made use of that cover. In actuality it had probably
been a manual laborer, a field hand, with aspirations for
something better. Do androids dream? Rick asked himself.
Evidently; that’s why they occasionally kill their employers
and flee here. A better life, without servitude. Like Luba
Luft; singing Don Giovanni and Le Nozze instead of toiling
across the face of a barren rock-strewn field. On a funda¬
mentally uninhabitable colony world.

Roy Baty (the poop sheet informed him) has an ag¬
gressive, assertive air of ersatz authority. Given to

184




DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


185


mystical preoccupations, this android proposed the
group escape attempt, underwriting it ideologically
with a pretentious fiction as to the sacredness of so-
called android “life.” In addition, this android stole,
and experimented with, various mind-fusing drugs,
claiming when caught that it hoped to promote in an¬
droids a group experience similar to that of Mer-
cerism, which it pointed out remains unavailahle to
androids.

The account had a pathetic quality. A rough, cold an¬
droid, hoping to undergo an experience from which, due
to a deliberately huilt-in defect, it remained excluded. But
he could not work up much concern for Roy Baty; he
caught, from Dave’s jottings, a repellent quality hanging
about this particular android. Baty had tried to force the
fusion experience into existence for itself—and then, when
that fell through, it had engineered the killing of a variety
of human beings . . . followed by the flight to Earth. And
now, especially as of today, the chipping away of the origi¬
nal eight androids until only the three remained. And they,
the outstanding members of the illegal group, were also
doomed, since if he failed to get them, someone else
would. Time and tide, he thought. The cycle of life. Ending
in this, the last twilight. Before the silence of death. He
perceived in this a micro-universe, complete.

The door of the hotel room banged open. “What a
flight,” Rachael Rosen said breathlessly, entering in a long
fish-scale coat with matching bra and shorts; she carried,
besides her big, ornate, mail-pouch purse, a paper bag.
“This is a nice room.” She examined her wristwatch. “Less


186


PHILIP K. DICK


than an hour; I made good time. Here.” She held out the
paper hag. “I bought a bottle. Bourbon.”

Rick said, “The worst of the eight is still alive. The one
who organized them.” He held the poop sheet on Roy Baty
toward her; Rachael set down the paper bag and accepted
the carbon sheet.

“You’ve located this one?” she asked, after reading.

“1 have a conapt number. Out in the suburbs where pos¬
sibly a couple of deteriorated specials, antheads and
chickenheads, hang out and go through their versions of
living.”

Rachael held out her hand. “Let’s see about the others.”

“Both females.” He passed her the sheets, one dealing
with Irmgard Baty, the other an android calling itself Pris
Stratton.

Glancing at the final sheet Rachael said, “Oh—” She
tossed the sheets down, moved over to the window of the
room to look out at downtown San Francisco. “I think
you’re going ]to get thrown by the last one. Maybe not;
maybe you don’t care.” She had turned pale and her voice
shook. All at once she had become exceptionally unsteady.

“Exactly what are you muttering about?” He retrieved
the sheets, studied them, wondering which part had upset
Rachael.

“Let’s open the bourbon.” Rachael carried the paper
bag into the bathroom, got two glasses, returned; she still
seemed distracted and uncertain—and preoccupied. He
sensed the rapid flight of her hidden thoughts: the transi¬
tions showed on her frowning, tense face. “Can you get
this open?” she asked. “It’s worth a fortune, you realize.


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


187


It’s not synthetic; it’s from before the war, made from gen¬
uine mash.”

Taking the bottle, he opened it, poured bourbon in the
two tumblers. “Tell me what’s the matter,” he said.

Rachael said, “On the phone you told me if I flew down
here tonight you’d give up on the remaining three andys.
‘We’ll do something else,’ you said. But here we are—”

“Tell me what upset you,” he said.

Facing him defiantly, Rachael said, “Tell me what we’re
going to do instead of fussing and fretting around about
those last three Nexus-6 andys.” She unbuttoned her coat,
carried it to the closet, and hung it up. This gave him his
first chance to have a good long look at her.

Rachael’s proportions, he noticed once again, were odd;
with her heavy mass of dark hair, her head seemed large,
and because of her diminutive breasts, her body assumed a
lank, almost childlike stance. But her great eyes, with their
elaborate lashes, could only be those of a grown woman;
there the resemblance to adolescence ended. Rachael rested
very slightly on the fore-part of her feet, and her arms, as
they hung, bent at the joint: the stance, he reflected, of a
wary hunter of perhaps the Cro-Magnon persuasion. The
race of tall hunters, he said to himself. No excess flesh, a flat
belly, small behind and smaller bosom—Rachael had been
modeled on the Celtic type of build, anachronistic and at¬
tractive. Below the brief shorts her legs, slender, had a neu¬
tral, nonsexual quality, not much rounded off in nubile
curves. The total impression was good, however. Although
definitely that of a girl, not a woman. Except for the restless,
shrewd eyes.





188


PHILIP K. DICK


He sipped the bourbon; the power of it, the authorita¬
tive strong taste and scent, had become almost unfamiliar
to him and he had trouble swallowing. Rachael, in con¬
trast, had no difficulty with hers.

Seating herself on the bed, Rachael smoothed absently
at the spread; her expression had now become one of
moodiness. He set his glass down on the bedside table and
arranged himself beside her. Under his gross weight the
bed gave, and Rachael shifted her position.

“What is it?” he said. Reaching, he took hold of her
hand; it felt cold, bony, slightly moist. “What upset you?”

“That last goddamn Nexus-6 type,” Rachael said, enun¬
ciating with effort, “is the same type as I am.” She stared
down at the bedspread, found a thread, and began rolling
it into a pellet. “Didn’t you notice the description? It’s of
me, too. She may wear her hair differently and dress dif¬
ferently—she may even have bought a wig. But when you
see her you’ll know what I mean.” She laughed sardon¬
ically. “It’s a good thing the association admitted I’m an
andy; otherwise you’d probably have gone mad when you
caught sight of Pris Stratton. Or thought she was me.”

“Why does that bother you so much?”

“Hell, I’ll be along when you retire her.”

“Maybe not. Maybe I won’t find her.”

Rachael said, “I know Nexus-6 psychology. That’s why
I’m here; that’s why I can help you. They’re all holed up
together, the last three of them. Clustered around the de¬
ranged one calling himself Roy Baty. He’ll be mastermind¬
ing their crucial, all-out, final defense.” Her lips twisted.
“Jesus,” she said.

“Cheer up,” he said; he cupped her sharp, small chin in


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


189


the palm of his hand, lifted her head so that she had to
face him. I wonder what it’s like to kiss an android, he said
to himself. Leaning forward an inch, he kissed her dry lips.
No reaction followed; Rachael remained impassive. As if
unaffected. And yet he sensed otherwise. Or perhaps it
was wishful thinking.

“I wish,” Rachael said, “that 1 had known that before 1
came. I never would have flown down here. 1 think you’re
asking too much. You know what I have? Toward this Pris
android?”

“Empathy,” he said.

“Something like that. Identification; there goes I. My
god; mayhe that’s what’ll happen. In the confusion you’ll
retire me, not her. And she can go hack to Seattle and live
my life. I never felt this way before. We are machines,
stamped out like bottle caps. It’s an illusion that I—I per¬
sonally—really exist; I’m just representative of a type.”
She shuddered.

He could not help being amused; Rachael had become
so mawkishly morose. “Ants don’t feel like that,” he said,
“and they’re physically identical.”

“Ants. They don’t feel period.”

“Identical human twins. They don’t—”

“But they identify with each other; I understand they
have an empathic, special bond.” Rising, she got to the
bourbon bottle, a little unsteadily; she refilled her glass
and again drank swiftly. For a time she slouched about the
room, brows knitted darkly, and then, as if sliding his way
by chance, she settled back onto the bed; she swung her
legs up and stretched out, leaning against the fat pillows.
And sighed. “Forget the three andys.” Her voice filled with


190


PHILIP K. DICK


weariness. “I’m so worn out, from the trip I guess. And
from all I learned today. I just want to sleep.” She shut her
eyes. “If I die,” she murmured, “maybe I’ll be born again
when the Rosen Association stamps out its next unit of my
subtype.” She opened her eyes and glared at him fero¬
ciously. “Do you know,” she said, “why I really came here?
Why Eldon and the other Rosens—the human ones—
wanted me to go along with you?”

“To observe,” he said. “To detail exactly what the
Nexus-6 does that gives it away on the Voigt-Kampff test.”

“On the test or otherwise. Everything that gives it a dif¬
ferent quality. And then I report back and the association
makes modifications of its zygote-bath DNS factors. And
we then have the Nexus-7. And when that gets caught, we
modify again and eventually the association has a type
that can’t be distinguished.”

“Do you know of the Boneli Reflex-Arc Test?” he asked.

“We’re working on the spinal ganglia, too. Someday
the Boneli test will fade into yesterday’s hoary shroud of ,
spiritual oblivion.” She smiled innocuously—at variance
with her words. At this point he could not discern her de¬
gree of seriousness. A topic of world-shaking importance,
yet dealt with facetiously; an android trait, possibly, he
thought. No emotional awareness, no feeling-sense of the
actual meaning of what she said. Only the hollow, formal,
intellectual definitions of the separate terms.

And, more, Rachael had begun to tease him. Impercep¬
tibly she had passed from lamenting her condition to
taunting him about his.

“Damn you,” he said.

Rachael laughed. “I’m drunk. I can’t go with you. If you


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


191


leave here—” She gestured in dismissal. “I’ll stay behind
and sleep and you can tell me later what happened.”

“Except,” he said, “there won’t he a later because Roy
Baty will nail me.”

“But 1 can’t help you anyhow now because I’m drunk.
Anyhow, you know the truth, the brick-hard, irregular,
slithery surface of truth. I’m just an observer and I won’t
intervene to save you; I don’t care if Roy Baty nails you or
not. I care whether I get nailed.” She opened her eyes
round and wide. “Christ, I’m empathic about myself. And,
see, if I go to that suburban broken-down conapt build¬
ing—” She reached out, toyed with a button of his shirt; in
slow, facile twists she began unbuttoning it. “I don’t dare
go because androids have no loyalty to one another and I
know that that goddamn Pris Stratton will destroy me and
occupy my place. See? Take off your coat.”

“Why?”

“So we can go to bed,” Rachael said.

“I bought a black Nubian goat,” he said. “I have to retire
the three more andys. I have to finish up my job and go
home to my wife.” He got up, walked around the bed to the
bottle of bourbon. Standing there, he carefully poured
himself a second drink; his hands, he observed, shook only
very slightly. Probably from fatigue. Both of us, he real¬
ized, are tired. Too tired to hunt down three andys, with
the worst of the eight calling the shots.

Standing there he realized, all at once, that he had ac¬
quired an overt, incontestable fear directed toward the
principal android. It all hung on Baty—had hung on it
from the start. Up to now he had encountered and retired
progressively more ominous manifestations of Baty. Now



192


PHILIP K. DICK


came Baty itself. Thinking that, he felt the fear grow; it
snared him completely, now that he had let it approach his
conscious mind. “1 can’t go without you now,” he said to
Rachael. “1 can’t even leave here. Polokov came after me;
Garland virtually came after me.”

“You think Roy Baty will look you up?” Setting down her
empty glass, she bent forward, reached back, and unfas¬
tened her bra. With agility she slid it from her, then stood,
swaying, and grinning because she swayed. “In my purse,”
she said, “1 have a mechanism which our autofac on Mars
builds as an emer—” She grimaced. “An emergency safety
thingamajing, -jig, while they’re putting a newly made
andy through its routine inspection checks. Get it out. It
resembles an oyster. You’ll see it.”

He began hunting through the purse. Like a human
woman, Rachael had every class of object conceivable
filched and hidden away in her purse; he found himself
rooting interminably.

Meanwhile, Rachael kicked off her boots and unzipped
her shorts; balancing on one foot, she caught the dis¬
carded fabric with her toe and tossed it across the room.
She then dropped onto the bed, rolled over to fumble for
her glass, accidentally pushed the glass to the carpeted
floor. “Damn,” she said, and once again got shakily to her
feet; in her underpants she stood watching him at work on
her purse, and then, wdth careful deliberation and atten¬
tion she drew the bedcovers back, got in, drew the covers
over her.

“Is this it?” He held up a metallic sphere with a button-
stem projecting.

“That cancels an android into catalepsy,” Rachael said.


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


193


her eyes shut. “For a few seconds. Suspends its respira¬
tion; yours, too, hut humans can function without respir¬
ing—perspiring?—for a couple of minutes, hut the vagus
nerve of an andy—”

“I know.” He straightened up. “The android autonomic
nervous system isn’t as flexible at cutting in and out as
ours. But as you say, this wouldn’t work for more than five
or six seconds.”

“Long enough,” Rachael murmured, “to save your life.
So, see—” She roused herself, sat up in the bed. “If Roy
Baty shows up here, you can be holding that in your hand
and you can press the stem on that thing. And while Roy
Baty is frozen stiff with no air supply to his blood and his
brain cells deteriorating you can kill Roy Baty with your
laser.”

“You have a laser tube,” he said. “In your purse.”

“A fake. Androids”—she yawned, eyes again shut—
“aren’t permitted to carry lasers.”

He walked over to the bed.

Squirming about, Rachael managed to roll over at last
onto her stomach, face buried in the white lower sheet.
“This is a clean, noble, virgin type of bed,” she stated.
“Only clean, noble girls who—” She pondered. “Androids
can’t bear children,” she said then. “Is that a loss?”

He finished undressing her. Exposed her pale, cold
loins.

“Is it a loss?” Rachael repeated. “1 don’t really know; 1
have no way to tell. How does it feel to have a child? How
does it feel to be born, for that matter? We’re not born; we
don’t grow up; instead of dying from illness or old age, we
wear out like ants. Ants again; that’s what we are. Not



194


PHILIP K. DICK


you; I mean me. Chitinous reflex-machines who aren’t
really alive.” She twisted her head to one side, said loudly,
“/m not alive! You’re not going to hed with a woman.
Don’t be disappointed; okay? Have you ever made love to
an android before?”

“No,” he said, taking off his shirt and tie.

“1 understand—they tell me—it’s convincing if you don’t
think too much about it. But if you think too much, if you
reflect on what you’re doing—then you can’t go on. For,
ahem, physiological reasons.”

Bending, he kissed her bare shoulder.

“Thanks, Rick,” she said wanly. “Remember, though:
don’t think about it, just do it. Don’t pause and be philosoph¬
ical, because from a philosophical standpoint it’s dreary. For
us both.”

He said, “Afterward 1 still intend to look for Roy Baty. 1
still need you to be there. 1 know that laser tube you have
in your purse is—”

“You think I’ll retire one of your andys for you?”

“1 think in spite of what you said you’ll help me all you
can. Otherwise you wouldn’t be lying there in that bed.”

“1 love you,” Rachael said. “If 1 entered a room and
found a sofa covered with your hide I’d score very high on
the Voigt-Kampff test.”

Tonight sometime, he thought as he clicked off the bed¬
side light, 1 will retire a Nexus-6 which looks exactly like
this naked girl. My good god, he thought; I’ve wound up
where Phil Resch said. Go to bed with her first, he remem-
bered. Then kill her. “1 can’t do it,” he said, and backed
away from the bed.

“1 wish you could,” Rachael said. Her voice wavered.






DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


195


“Not because of you. Because of Pris Stratton; what I
have to do to her.”

“We’re not the same. I don’t care about Pris Stratton.

Listen.” Rachael thrashed about in the bed, sitting up; in

the gloom he could dimly make out her almost breastless,

trim shape. “Go to bed with me and III retire Stratton.

Okay? Because I can’t stand getting this close and then—”

“Thank you,” he said; gratitude—undoubtedly because

of the bourbon—rose up inside him, constricting his
_ *

throat. Two, he thought. 1 now have only two to retire; just
the Batys. Would Rachael really do it? Evidently. Androids
thought and functioned that way. Yet he had never come
across anything quite like this.

“Goddamn it, get into bed,” Rachael said.

He got into bed.


/





17


Afterward they enjoyed a great luxury: Rick had room ser¬
vice bring up coffee. He sat for a long time within the arms
of a green, black, and gold leaf lounge chair, sipping coffee
and meditating about the next few hours. Rachael, in the
bathroom, squeaked and hummed and splashed in the midst
of a hot shower.

“You made a good deal when you made that deal,” she
called when she had shut off the water; dripping, her hair
tied up with a rubber band, she appeared bare and pink at
the bathroom door. “We androids can’t control our physi¬
cal, sensual passions. You probably knew that; in my opin¬
ion you took advantage of me.” She did not, however,
appear genuinely angry. If anything she had become cheer¬
ful and certainly as human as any girl he had knovm. “Do
we really have to go track down those three andys tonight?”

“Yes,” he said. Two for me to retire, he thought; one for
you. As Rachael put it, the deal had been made.

Gathering a giant white bath towel about her, Rachael
said, “Did you enjoy that?”


196





DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


197


“Yes.”

“Would you ever go to bed with an android again?”

“If it was a girl. If she resembled you.”

Rachael said, “Do you know what the lifespan of a hu¬
manoid robot such as myself is? I’ve been in existence two
years. How long do you calculate I have?”

After a hesitation he said, “About two more years.”

“They never could solve that problem. I mean cell re¬
placement. Perpetual or anyhow semi-perpetual renewal.
Well, so it goes.” Vigorously she began drying herself. Her
face had become expressionless.

“I’m sorry,” Rick said.

“Hell,” Rachael said, “I’m sorry I mentioned it. Anyhow it
keeps humans from running off and living with an android.”

“And this is true with you Nexus-6 types, too?”

“It’s the metabolism. Not the brain unit.” She trotted
out, swept up her underpants, and began to dress.

He, too, dressed. Then together, saying little, the two of
them journeyed to the roof field, where his hovercar had
been parked by the pleasant white-clad human attendant.

As they headed toward the suburbs of San Francisco,
Rachael said, “It’s a nice night.”

“My goat is probably asleep by now,” he said. “Or
maybe goats are nocturnal. Some animals never sleep.
Sheep never do, not that I could detect; whenever you look
at them they’re looking back. Expecting to be fed.”

“What sort of wife do you have?”

He did not answer.

“Do you—”

“If you weren’t an android,” Rick interrupted, “if I could
legally marry you, I would.”








1

i

198 PHILIPK.DICKi

i'

Rachael said, “Or we could live in sin, except that I’m |
not alive.” j

“Legally you’re not. But really you are. Biologically, j
You’re not made out of transistorized circuits like a false 1
animal; you’re an organic entity.” And in two years, he
thought, you’ll wear out and die. Because we never solved j
the problem of cell replacement, as you pointed out. So I
guess it doesn’t matter anyhow.

This is my end, he said to himself. As a bounty hunter.
After the Batys there won’t be any more. Not after this,
tonight.

“You look so sad,” Rachael said.

Putting his hand out, he touched her cheek.

“You’re not going to be able to hunt androids any
longer,” she said calmly. “So don’t look sad. Please.” !

He stared at her.

“No bounty hunter ever has gone on,” Rachael said. “Af¬
ter being with me. Except one. A very cynical man. Phil
Resch. And he’s nutty; he works out in left field on his ovm.”

“I see,” Rick said. He felt numb. Completely. Through¬
out his entire body.

“But this trip we’re taking,” Rachael said, “won’t be
wasted, because you’re going to meet a wonderful, spiri¬
tual man.”

“Roy Baty,” he said. “Do you know all of them?”

“I knew all of them, when they still existed. I know
three, now. We tried to stop you this morning, before you
started out with Dave Holden’s list. I tried again, just be¬
fore Polokov reached you. But then after that I had to
wait.”

“Until I broke down,” he said. “And had to call you.”




199


I DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?

“Luba Luft and I had been close, very close friends
for almost two years. What did you think of her? Did you
like her?”

“1 liked her.”

“But you killed her.”

I “Phil Resch killed her.”

“Oh, so Phil accompanied you back to the opera house.
We didn’t know that; our communications broke down
about then. We knew just that she had been killed; we nat-

j urally assumed by you.”

“From Dave’s notes,” he said, “I think 1 can still go

1

j ahead and retire Roy Baty. But maybe not Irmgard Baty.”

I And not Pris Stratton, he thought. Even now; even know-
ing this. “So all that took place at the hotel,” he said, “con¬
sisted of a—”

“The association,” Rachael said, “wanted to reach the
bounty hunters here and in the Soviet Union. This seemed

j to work . . . for reasons which we do not fully understand.
Our limitation again, 1 guess.”

I “1 doubt if it works as often or as well as you say,” he

!■

' said thickly.

“But it has with you.”

; “We’ll see.”

“1 already know,” Rachael said. “When 1 saw that ex¬
pression on your face, that grief. 1 look for that.”

“How many times have you done this?”

“I don’t remember. Seven, eight. No, 1 believe it’s nine.”
She—or rather it—nodded. “Yes, nine times.”

“The idea is old-fashioned,” Rick said.

Startled, Rachael said, “W-What?”

Pushing the steering wheel away from him, he put the











200


PHILIP K. DICK


car into a gliding decline. “Or anyhow that’s how it strikes
me. I’m going to kill you,” he said. “And go on to Roy and
Irmgard Baty and Pris Stratton alone.”

“That’s why you’re landing?” Apprehensively, she said,
“There’s a fine; I’m the property, the legal property, of the
association. I’m not an escaped android who fled here from
Mars; I’m not in the same class as the others.”

“But,” he said, “if 1 can kill you then 1 can kill them.”

Her hands dived for her bulging, overstuffed, kipple-fiUed
purse; she searched frantically, then gave up. “Goddamn
this purse,” she said with ferocity. “1 never can lay my hands
on anything in it. Will you kill me in a way that won’t hurt? 1
mean, do it carefully. If 1 don’t fight; okay? 1 promise not to
fight. Do you agree?”

Rick said, “1 understand now why Phil Resch said what he
said. He wasn’t being cynical; he had just learned too much.
Going through this—1 can’t blame him. It warped him.”

“But the wrong way.” She seemed more externally com¬
posed now. But still fundamentally frantic and tense. Yet,
the dark fire waned; the life force oozed out of her, as he
had so often witnessed before with other androids. The
classic resignation. Mechanical, intellectual acceptance of
that which a genuine organism—with two billion years of
the pressure to live and evolve hagriding it—could never
have reconciled itself to.

“1 can’t stand the way you androids give up,” he said
savagely. The car now swooped almost to the ground; he
had to jerk the wheel toward him to avoid a crash. Brak¬
ing, he managed to bring the car to a staggering, careening
halt; he slammed off the motor and got out his laser tube.

“At the occipital bone, the posterior base of my skull,”




I DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP? 201

j

!

I Rachael said. “Please.” She twisted about so that she did
not have to look at the laser tube; the beam would enter
I unperceived.

I Putting his laser tube away, Rick said, “I can’t do what
! Phil Resch said.” He snapped the motor back on, and a
moment later they had taken off again.

“If you’re ever going to do it,” Rachael said, “do it now.
Don’t make me wait.”

“I’m not going to kill you.” He steered the car in the di¬
rection of downtown San Francisco once again. “Your
car’s at the St. Francis, isn’t it? I’ll let you off there and
I you can head for Seattle.” That ended what he had to say;
j he drove in silence.

I “Thanks for not killing me,” Rachael said presently.

“Hell, as you said, you’ve only got two years of life left,
anyhow. And I’ve got fifty. I’ll live twenty-five times as long
as you.”

“But you really look down on me,” Rachael said. “For
what I did.” Assurance had returned to her; the litany of
her voice picked up pace. “You’ve gone the way of the oth¬
ers. The bounty hunters before you. Each time they get fu¬
rious and talk wildly about killing me, but when the time
comes they can’t do it. Just like you, just now.” She lit
a cigarette, inhaled with relish. “You realize what this
means, don’t you? It means I was right; you won’t be able
to retire any more androids; it won’t be just me, it’ll be the
Batys and Stratton, too. So go on home to your goat. And
get some rest.” Suddenly she brushed at her coat, vio¬
lently. “Yife! I got a burning ash from my cigarette—there,
it’s gone.” She sank back against the seat, relaxing.

He said nothing.












202


PHILIP K. DICK


“That goat,” Rachael said. “You love the goat more than
me. More than you love your wife, probably. First the goat,
then your wife, then last of all—” She laughed merrily.
“What can you do but laugh?”

He did not answer. They continued in silence for a while
and then Rachael poked about, found the car’s radio and
switched it on.

“Turn it off,” Rick said.

“Turn off Buster Friendly and his Friendly Friends?
Turn off Amanda Werner and Oscar Scruggs? It’s time to
hear Buster’s big sensational expose, which is finally al¬
most arrived.” She stooped to read the dial of her watch by
the radio’s light. “Very soon now. Did you already know
about it? He’s been talking about it, building up to it, for—”

The radio said, “—ah jes wan ta tell ya, folks, that ahm
sitten hih with my pal Bustuh, an we’re tawkin en havin a
real mighty fine time, waitin expectantly as we ah with
each tick uh the clock foh what ah understan is the mos
important announcement of—”

Rick shut the radio off. “Oscar Scruggs,” he said. “The
voice of intelligent man.”

Instantly reaching, Rachael clicked the radio hack on. “I
want to listen. I intend to listen. This is important, what
Buster Friendly has to say on his show tonight.” The idi¬
otic voice babbled once more from the speaker, and
Rachael Rosen settled back and made herself comfortable.
Beside him in- the darkness the coal of her cigarette
glowed like the rump of a complacent lightning bug: a
steady, unwavering index of Rachael Rosen’s achieve¬
ment. Her victory over him.


tB


“Bring the rest of my property up here,” Pris ordered J. R.
Isidore. “In particular I want the TV set. So we can hear
Buster’s announcement.”

“Yes,” Irmgard Baty agreed, hright-eyed, like a darting,
plumed swift. “We need the TV; we’ve been waiting a long
time for tonight and now it’ll be starting soon.”

Isidore said, “My own set gets the government channel.”

Off in a corner of the living room, seated in a deep chair
as if he intended to remain permanently, as if he had taken
up lodgings in the chair, Roy Baty belched and said pa¬
tiently, “It’s Buster Friendly and his Friendly Friends that
we want to watch, Iz. Or do you want me to call you J. R.?
Anyhow, do you understand? So will you go get the set?”

Alone, Isidore made his way down the echoing, empty
hall to the stairs. The potent, strong fragrance of happi¬
ness still bloomed in him, the sense of being—for the first
time in his dull life—useful. Others depend on me now, he
exulted as he trudged down the dust-impacted steps to the
level beneath.


203







204


PHILIP K. DICK


And, he thought, it’ll be nice to see Buster Friendly on
TV again, instead of just listening on the radio in the store
truck. And that’s right, he realized; Buster Friendly is go¬
ing to reveal his carefully documented sensational expose
tonight. So because of Pris and Roy and Irmgard I get to
watch what will probably be the most important piece of
news to be released in many years. How about that, he
said to himself.

Life, for J. R. Isidore, had definitely taken an upswing.

He entered Pris’s former apartment, unplugged the TV
set, and detached the antenna. The silence, all at once,
penetrated; he felt his arms grow vague. In the absence of
the Batys and Pris he found himself fading out, becoming
strangely like the inert television set which he had just un¬
plugged. You have to be with other people, he thought. In
order to live at all. I mean, before they came here I could
stand it, being alone in the building. But now it’s changed.
You can’t go back, he thought. You can’t go from people to
nonpeople. In panic he thought. I’m dependent on them.
Thank god they stayed.

It would require two trips to transfer Pris’s possessions
to the apartment above. Hoisting the TV set, he decided to
take it first, then the suitcases and remaining clothes.

A few minutes later he had gotten the TV set upstairs;
his fingers groaning, he placed it on a coffee table in his
living room. The Batys and Pris watched impassively.

“We got a good signal in this building,” he panted as he
plugged in the cord and attached the antenna. “When I
used to get Buster Friendly and his—”

“Just turn the set on,” Roy Baty said. “And stop talking.”

He did so, then hurried to the door. “One more trip,” he



I

I

DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP? 205

1

I

said, “will do it.” He lingered, warming himself at the
I hearth of their presence.

; “Fine,” Pris said remotely.

Isidore started off once more. I think, he thought,
they’re exploiting me sort of. But he did not care. They’re
still good friends to have, he said to himself.

Downstairs again, he gathered the girl’s clothing to¬
gether, stuffed every piece into the suitcases, then labored
back dowm the hall once again and up the stairs.

I On a step ahead of him something small moved in
I the dust.

Instantly he dropped the suitcases; he whipped out a
plastic medicine bottle, which, like everyone else, he car¬
ried for just this. A spider, undistinguished but alive.
Shakily he eased it into the bottle and snapped the cap—
i perforated by means of a needle—shut tight.

Upstairs, at the door of his apartment, he paused to get
his breath.

“—yes sir, folks; the time is now. This is Buster
Friendly, who hopes and trusts you’re as eager as 1 am to
I share the discovery which I’ve made, and by the way, had
verified by top trained research workers working extra
I hours over the past weeks. Ho ho, folks; this is itr
John Isidore said, “1 found a spider.”

The three androids glanced up, momentarily moving
their attention from the TV screen to him.

“Let’s see it,” Pris said. She held out her hand.

I Roy Baty said, “Don’t talk while Buster is on.”

“I’ve never seen a spider,” Pris said. She cupped the
I medicine bottle in her palms, surveying the creature
I within. “All those legs. Why’s it need so many legs, J. R.?”










206


PHILIP K . DICK


“That’s the way spiders are,” Isidore said, his heart
pounding; he had difficulty breathing. “Eight legs.”

Rising to her feet, Pris said, “You know what I think,
J. R.? I think it doesn’t need all those legs.”

“Eight?” Irmgard Baty said. “Why couldn’t it get by on
four? Cut four off and see.” Impulsively opening her purse,
she produced a pair of clean, sharp cuticle scissors, which
she passed to Pris.

A weird terror struck at J. R. Isidore.

Carrying the medicine bottle into the kitchen, Pris
seated herself at J. R. Isidore’s breakfast table. She re¬
moved the lid from the bottle and dumped the spider out.
“It probably won’t be able to run as fast,” she said, “but
there’s nothing for it to catch around here anyhow. It’ll die
anyway.” She reached for the scissors.

“Please,” Isidore said.

Pris glanced up inquiringly. “Is it worth something?”

“Don’t mutilate it,” he said wheezingly. Imploringly.

With the scissors, Pris snipped off one of the spider’s legs.

In the living room Buster Friendly on the TV screen
said, “Take a look at this enlargement of a section of back¬
ground. This is the sky you usually see. Wait, I’ll have Earl
Parameter, head of my research staff, explain their virtu¬
ally world-shaking discovery to you.”

Pris clipped off another leg, restraining the spider with
the edge of her hand. She was smiling.

“Blowups of the video pictures,” a new voice from the
TV said, “when subjected to rigorous laboratory scrutiny,
reveal that the gray backdrop of sky and daytime moon
against which Mercer moves is not only not Terran—it is
artificial''






DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


207


“You’re missing it!” Irmgard called anxiously to Pris;
she rushed to the kitchen door, saw what Pris had begun
doing. “Oh, do that afterward,” she said coaxingly. “This is
so important, what they’re saying; it proves that every¬
thing we believed—”

“Be quiet,” Roy Baty said.

“—is true,” Irmgard finished.

The TV set continued, “The ‘moon’ is painted; in the en¬
largements, one of which you see now on your screen,
brush strokes show. And there is even some evidence that
the scraggly weeds and dismal, sterile soil—perhaps even
the stones hurled at Mercer by unseen alleged parties—
are equally faked. It is quite possible in fact that the
‘stones’ are made of soft plastic, causing no authentic
wounds.”

“In other words,” Buster Friendly broke in, “Wilbur
Mercer is not suffering at all.”

The research chief said, “We at last managed, Mr.
Friendly, to track down a former Hollywood special-effects
man, a Mr. Wade Cortot, who flatly states, from his years
of experience, that the figure of ‘Mercer’ could well be
merely some bit player marching across a sound stage.
Cortot has gone so far as to declare that he recognizes the
stage as one used by a now out-of-business minor movie¬
maker with whom Cortot had various dealings several
decades ago.”

“So according to Cortot,” Buster Friendly said, “there
can be virtually no doubt.”

Pris had now cut three legs from the spider, which crept
about miserably on the kitchen table, seeking a way out, a
path to freedom. It found none.









208


PHILIP K. DICK


“Quite frankly, we believed Cortot,” the research chief
said in his dry, pedantic voice, “and we spent a good deal
of time examining publicity pictures of bit players once
employed by the now defunct Hollywood movie industry.”

“And you found—”

“Listen to this,” Roy Baty said. Irmgard gazed fixedly at
the TV screen, and Pris had ceased her mutilation of the
spider.

“We located, by means of thousands upon thousands of
photographs, a very old man now, named A1 Jarry, who
played a number of bit parts in pre-war films. From our lab
we sent a team to Jarry’s home in East Harmony, Indiana.
I’ll let one of the members of that team describe what he
found.” Silence, then a new voice, equally pedestrian. “The
house on Lark Avenue in East Harmony is tottering and
shabby and at the edge of town, where no one, except A1
Jarry, still lives. Invited amiably in, and seated in the stale-
smelling, moldering, kipple-filled living room, I scanned by
telepathic means the blurred, debris-cluttered, and hazy
mind of AI Jarry seated across from me.”

“Listen,” Roy Baty said, on the edge of his seat, poised
as if to pounce.

“I found,” the technician continued, “that the old man
did in actuality make a series of short fifteen-minute video
films, for an employer whom he never met. And, as we
had theorized, the ‘rocks’ did consist of rubber-like plas¬
tic. The ‘blood’ shed was catsup, and”—the technician
chuckled—“the only suffering Mr. Jarry underwent was
having to go an entire day without a shot of whisky.”

“AI Jarry,” Buster Friendly said, his face returning to
the screen. “Well, well. An old man who even in his prime


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


209


never amounted to anything which either he or ourselves
could respect. A1 Jarry made a repetitious and dull film, a
series of them in fact, for whom he knew not—and does
not to this day. It has often been said by adherents of the
experience of Mercerism that Wilbur Mercer is not a hu-

I

I man being, that he is in fact an archetypal superior entity
perhaps from another star. Well, in a sense this contention
has proven correct. Wilbur Mercer is not human, does not
in fact exist. The world in which he climbs is a cheap, Hol¬
lywood, commonplace sound stage which vanished into
kipple years ago. And who, then, has spawned this hoax
on the Sol System? Think about that for a time, folks.”

“We may never know,” Irmgard murmured.

Buster Friendly said, “We may never know. Nor can we
fathom the peculiar purpose behind this swindle. Yes,
folks, swindle. Mercerism is a swindler

“I think we know^” Roy Baty said. “It’s obvious. Mer¬
cerism came into existence—”

“But ponder this,” Buster Friendly continued. “Ask
yourselves what is it that Mercerism does. Well, if we’re to
believe its many practitioners, the experience fuses—”

“It’s that empathy that humans have,” Irmgard said.

“—men and women throughout the Sol System into a
single entity. But an entity which is manageable by the so-
called telepathic voice of ‘Mercer.’ Mark that. An ambi¬
tious politically minded would-be Hitler could—”

“No, it’s that empathy,” Irmgard said vigorously. Fists
clenched, she roved into the kitchen, up to Isidore. “Isn’t it
a way of proving that humans can do something we can’t
do? Because without the Mercer experience we just have
your word that you feel this empathy business, this






210


PHILIP K. DICK


shared, group thing. How’s the spider?” She bent over
Pris’s shoulder.

With the scissors, Pris snipped off another of the spi¬
der’s legs. “Four now,” she said. She nudged the spider.
“He won’t go. But he can.”

Roy Baty appeared at the doorway, inhaling deeply, an
expression of accomplishment on his face. “It’s done.
Buster said it out loud, and nearly every human in the sys¬
tem heard him say it. ‘Mercerism is a swindle.’ The whole
experience of empathy is a swindle.” He came over to look
curiously at the spider.

“It won’t try to walk,” Irmgard said.

“I can make it walk.” Roy Baty got out a book of
matches, lit a match; he held it near the spider, closer and
closer, until at last it crept feebly away.

“I was right,” Irmgard said. “Didn’t I say it could walk
with only four legs?” She peered up expectantly at Isi¬
dore. “What’s the matter?” Touching his arm she said,
“You didn’t lose anything; we’ll pay you what that—
what’s it called?—that Sidney's catalogue says. Don’t look
so grim. Isn’t that something about Mercer, what they dis¬
covered? All that research? Hey, answer.” She prodded
him anxiously.

“He’s upset,” Pris said. “Because he has an empathy
box. In the other room. Do you use it, J. R.?” she asked
Isidore.

Roy Baty said, “Of course he uses it. They all do—or did.
Maybe now they’ll start wondering.”

“I don’t think this will end the cult of Mercer,” Pris said.
“But right this minute there’re a lot of unhappy human be¬
ings.” To Isidore she said, “We’ve waited for months; we


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


211


all knew it was coming, this pitch of Buster’s.” She hesi¬
tated and then said, “Well, why not. Buster is one of us.”

“An android,” Irmgard explained. “And nobody knows.
No humans, 1 mean.”

Pris, with the scissors, cut yet another leg from the spi¬
der. All at once John Isidore pushed her away and lifted
up the mutilated creature. He carried it to the sink and
there he drowned it. In him, his mind, his hopes, drowned,
too. As swiftly as the spider.

“He’s really upset,” Irmgard said nervously. “Don’t look
like that, J. R. And why don’t you say anything?” To Pris
and to her husband she said, “It makes me terribly upset,
him just standing there by the sink and not speaking; he
hasn’t said anything since we turned on the TV.”

“It’s not the TV,” Pris said. “It’s the spider. Isn’t it, John R.
Isidore? He’ll get over it,” she said to Irmgard, who had
gone into the other room to shut off the TV.

Regarding Isidore with easy amusement, Roy Baty said,
“It’s all over now, Iz. For Mercerism, I mean.” With his
nails he managed to lift the corpse of the spider from the
sink. “Maybe this was the last spider,” he said. “The last
living spider on Earth.” He reflected. “In that case it’s all
over for spiders, too.”

“I—don’t feel well,” Isidore said. From the kitchen cup¬
board he got a cup; he stood holding it for an interval—he
did not know exactly how long. And then he said to Roy
Baty, “Is the sky behind Mercer just painted? Not real?”

“You saw the enlargements on the TV screen,” Roy Baty
said. “The brush strokes.”

“Mercerism isn’t finished,” Isidore said. Something
ailed the three androids, something terrible. The spider.


212


PHILIP K. DICK


he thought. Mayhe it had heen the last spider on Earth, as
Roy Baty said. And the spider is gone; Mercer is gone; he
saw the dust and the ruin of the apartment as it lay
spreading out everywhere—he heard the kipple coming,
the final disorder of all forms, the absence which would
wdn out. It grew around him as he stood holding the empty
ceramic cup; the cupboards of the kitchen creaked and
split and he felt the floor beneath his feet give.

Reaching out, he touched the wall. His hand broke the
surface; gray particles trickled and hurried down, frag¬
ments of plaster resembling the radioactive dust outside.
He seated himself at the table and, like rotten, hollow
tubes the legs of the chair bent; standing quickly, he set
down the cup and tried to reform the chair, tried to press
it back into its right shape. The chair came apart in his
hands, the screws which had previously connected its sev¬
eral sections ripping out and hanging loose. He saw, on
the table, the ceramic cup crack; webs of fine lines grew
like the shadows of a vine, and then a chip dropped from
the edge of the cup, exposing the rough, unglazed interior.

“What’s he doing?” Irmgard Baty’s voice came to him,
distantly. “He’s breaking everything! Isidore, stop—”

“I’m not doing it,” he said. He walked unsteadily into
the living room, to be by himself; he stood by the tattered
couch and gazed at the yellow, stained wall with all the
spots which dead bugs, that had once crawled, had left,
and again he thought of the corpse of the spider with its
four remaining legs. Everything in here is old, he realized.
It long ago began to decay and it won’t stop. The corpse of
the spider has taken over.

In the depression caused by the sagging of the floor.



DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


213


pieces of animals manifested themselves, the head of a
crow, mummified hands which might have once been
parts of monkeys. A donkey stood a little way off, not stir¬
ring and yet apparently alive; at least it had not begun to
deteriorate. He started toward it, feeling stick-like bones,
dry as weeds, splinter under his shoes. But before he
could reach the donkey—one of the creatures which he
loved the most—a shiny blue crow fell from above to perch
on the donkey’s unprotesting muzzle. Don’t, he said aloud,
but the crow, rapidly, picked out the donkey’s eyes. Again,
he thought. It’s happening to* me again. I will be dovm
here a long time, he realized. As before. It’s always long,
because nothing here ever changes; a point comes when it
does not even decay.

A dry wind rustled, and around him the heaps of bones
broke. Even the wind destroys them, he perceived. At this
stage. Just before time ceases. I wish I could remember
how to climb up from here, he thought. Looking up, he
saw nothing to grasp.

Mercer, he said aloud. Where are you now? This is the
tomb world and I am in it again, but this time you’re not
here, too.

Something crept across his foot. He knelt down and
searched for it—and found it because it moved so slowly.
The mutilated spider, advancing itself haltingly on its sur¬
viving legs; he picked it up and held it in the palm of his
hand. The hones, he realized, have reversed themselves;
the spider is again alive. Mercer must be near.

The wind blew, cracking and splintering the remaining
bones, but he sensed the presence of Mercer. Come here,
he said to Mercer. Crawl across my foot or find some other


214


PHILIP K. DICK


way of reaching me. Okay? Mercer, he thought. Aloud he
said, “Mercer!”

Across the landscape weeds advanced; v^^eeds cork¬
screwed their way into the walls around him and worked
the walls until the weeds became their own spore. The
spore expanded, split, and burst within the corrupted steel
and shards of concrete that had formerly been walls. But
the desolation remained after the walls had gone; the des¬
olation followed after everjThing else. Except the frail, dim
figure of Mercer; the old man faced him, a placid expres¬
sion on his face.

“Is the sky painted?” Isidore asked. “Are there really
brush strokes that show up under magnification?”

“Yes,” Mercer said.

“1 can’t see them.”

“You’re too close,” Mercer said. “You have to be a long
way off, the way the androids are. They have better per¬
spective.”

“Is that why they claim you’re a fraud?”

“I am a fraud,” Mercer said. “They’re sincere; their re¬
search is genuine. From their standpoint I am an elderly
retired bit player named A1 Jarry. All of it, their disclo¬
sure, is true. They interviewed me at my home, as they
claim; I told them whatever they wanted to know, which
was everything.”

“Including about the whisky?”

Mercer smiled. “It was true. They did a good job and
from their standpoint Buster Friendly’s disclosure was
convincing. They will have trouble understanding why
nothing has changed. Because you’re still here and I’m
still here.” Mercer indicated with a sweep of his hand the


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


215


barren, rising hillside, the familiar place. “I lifted you from
the tomb world just now and I will continue to lift you until
you lose interest and want to quit. But you will have to
stop searching for me because I will never stop searching
for you.”

“I didn’t like that about the whisky,” Isidore said.
“That’s lowering.”"

“That’s because you’re a highly moral person. I’m not. I
don’t judge, not even myself.” Mercer held out a closed
hand, palm up. “Before I forget it, I have something of
yours here.” He opened his fingers. On his hand rested the
mutilated spider, but with its snipped-off legs restored.

“Thanks.” Isidore accepted the spider. He started to say
something further—

An alarm bell clanged.

Roy Baty snarled, “There’s a bounty hunter in the build¬
ing! Get all the lights off. Get him away from that empathy
box; he has to be ready at the door. Go on —move himr


19


Looking down, John Isidore saw his own hands; they
gripped the twin handles of the empathy box. As he stood
gaping at them, the lights in the living room of his apart¬
ment plunged out. He could see, in the kitchen, Pris hurry¬
ing to catch the table lamp there.

“Listen, J. R.,” Irmgard whispered harshly in his ear;
she had grabbed him by the shoulder, her nails digging
into him with frantic intensity. She seemed unaware of
what she did now; in the dim nocturnal light from out¬
doors Irmgard’s face had become distorted, astigmatic. It
had turned into a craven dish, with cowering, tiny, lidless
eyes. “You have to go,” she whispered, “to the door, when
he knocks, if he does knock; you have to show him your
identification and tell him this is your apartment and no
one else is here. And you ask to see a warrant.” ,

Pris, standing on the other side of him, her body arched,
whispered, “Don’t let him in, J. R. Say anything; do any¬
thing that will stop him. Do you know what a bounty


216


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


217


hunter would do let loose in here? Do you understand
what he would do to us?”

Moving away from the two android females, Isidore
groped his way to the door; with his fingers he located the
knob, halted there, listening. He could sense the hall out¬
side, as he always had sensed it; vacant and reverberating
and lifeless.

“Hear anything?” Roy Baty said, bending close. Isidore
smelled the rank, cringing body; he inhaled fear from it,
fear pouring out, forming a mist. “Step out and take a look.”

Opening the door, Isidore looked up and down the indis¬
tinct hall. The air out here had a clear quality, despite the
weight of dust. He still held the spider which Mercer had
given him. Was it actually the spider which Pris had
snipped apart with Irmgard Baty’s cuticle scissors? Proba¬
bly not. He would never know. But anyhow it was alive; it
crept about within his closed hand, not biting him: as with
most small spiders, its mandibles could not puncture hu¬
man skin.

He reached the end of the hall, descended the stairs, and
stepped outside, onto what had once been a terraced path,
garden-enclosed. The garden had perished during the war
and the path had ruptured in a thousand places. But he
knew its surface; under his feet the familiar path felt good,
and he followed it, passed along the greater side of the
building, coming at last to the only verdant spot in the
vicinity—a yard-square patch of dust-saturated, drooping
weeds. There he deposited the spider. He experienced its
wavering progress as it departed his hand. Well, that was
that; he straightened up.


218


PHILIP K. DICK


A flashlight beam focused on the weeds; in its glare
their half-dead stalks appeared stark, menacing. Now he
could see the spider; it rested on a serrated leaf. So it had
gotten away all right.

“What did you do?” the man holding the flashlight
asked.

“I put down a spider,” he said, wondering why the man
didn’t see; in the beam of yellow light the spider bloated
up larger than life. “So it could get away.”

“Why don’t you take it up to your apartment? You ought
to keep it in ajar. According to the January Sidney’s most
spiders are up ten percent in retail price. You could have
gotten a hundred and some odd dollars for it.”

Isidore said, “If I took it back up there she’d cut it apart
again. Bit by bit, to see what it did.”

“Androids do that,” the man said. Reaching into his
overcoat, he brought out something which he flapped open
and extended toward Isidore.

In the irregular light the bounty hunter seemed a
medium man, not impressive. Round face and hairless,
smooth features; like a clerk in a bureaucratic office. Me¬
thodical but informal. Not demi-god in shape; not at all as
Isidore had anticipated him.

“I’m an investigator for the San Francisco Police De¬
partment. Deckard, Rick Deckard.” The man flapped his
ID shut again, stuck it back in his overcoat pocket.
“They’re up there now? The three?”

“Well, the thing is,” Isidore said, “I’m looking after them.
Two are women. They’re the last ones of the group; the rest
are dead. I brought Pris’s TV set up from her apartment
and put it in mine, so they could watch Buster Friendly.





DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


219


Buster proved beyond a doubt that Mercer doesn’t exist.”
Isidore felt excitement, knowing something of this impor¬
tance—news that the bounty hunter evidently hadn’t heard.

1

“Let’s go up there,” Deckard said. Suddenly he held a
i laser tube pointed at Isidore; then, indecisively, he put it
’ away. “You’re a special, aren’t you?” he said. “A chicken-
head.”

“But I have a job. I drive a truck for—” Horrified, he dis¬
covered he had forgotten the name. “—a pet hospital,” he
said. “The Van Ness Pet Hospital,” he said. “Owned b-b-by
Hannibal Sloat.”

Deckard said, “Will you take me up there and show me
which apartment they’re in? There’re over a thousand
separate apartments; you can save me a lot of time.” His
voice dipped with fatigue.

“If you kill them you won’t be able to fuse with Mercer
again,” Isidore said.

“You won’t take me up there? Show me which floor?
Just tell me the floor. I’ll figure out which apartment on
the floor it is.”

“No,” Isidore said.

“Under state and federal law,” Deckard began. He
ceased then. Giving up the interrogation. “Good night,” he
said, and walked away, up the path and into the building,
his flashlight bleeding a yellowed, diffuse path before him.

Inside the conapt building, Rick Deckard shut off his flash¬
light; guided by the ineffectual, recessed bulbs spaced
ahead of him, he made his way along the hall, thinking.
The chickenhead knows they’re androids; he knew it al¬
ready, before I told him. But he doesn’t understand. On





220


PHILIP K. DICK


the other hand, who does? Do I? Did I? And one of them
will he a duplicate of Rachael, he reflected. Maybe the spe¬
cial has been living with her. 1 wonder how he liked it, he
asked himself. Maybe that was the one who he believed
would cut up his spider. 1 could go back and get that spi¬
der, he reflected. I’ve never found a live, wild animal. It
must be a fantastic experience to look down and see some¬
thing living scuttling along. Maybe it’ll happen someday to
me like it did him.

He had brought listening gear from his car; he set it up,
now, a revolving detek-snout with blip screen. In the si¬
lence of the hall the screen indicated nothing. Not on this
floor, he said to himself. He clicked over to vertical. On
that axis the snout absorbed a faint signal. Upstairs. He
gathered up the gear and his briefcase and climbed the
stairs to the next floor.

A figure in the shadows waited.

“If you move I’ll retire you,” Rick said. The male one,
waiting for him. In his clenched fingers the laser tube felt
hard but he could not lift it and aim it. He had been caught
first, caught too soon.

“I’m not an android,” the figure said. “My name is Mer¬
cer.” It stepped into a zone of light. “1 inhabit this building
because of Mr. Isidore. The special who had the spider;
you talked briefly to him outside.”

“Am 1 outside Mercerism now?” Rick said. “As the
chickenhead said? Because of what I’m going to do in the
next few minutes?”

Mercer said, “Mr. Isidore spoke for himself, not for me.
What you are doing has to be done. 1 said that already.”
Raising his arm, he pointed at the stairs behind Rick. “I





DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


221


came to tell you that one of them is behind you and below,
not in the apartment. It will be the hard one of the three
and you must retire it first.” The rustling, ancient voice
gained abrupt fervor. “Quick, Mr. Deckard. On the steps.''

His laser tube thrust out, Rick spun and sank onto his
haunches facing the flight of stairs. Up it glided a woman,
toward him, and he knew her; he recognized her and low¬
ered his laser tube. “Rachael,” he said, perplexed. Had she
followed him in her own hovercar, tracked him here? And
why? “Go back to Seattle,” he said. “Leave me alone; Mer¬
cer told me I’ve got to do it.” And then he saw that it was
not quite Rachael.

“For what we’ve meant to each other,” the android said
as it approached him, its arms reaching as if to clutch at
him. The clothes, he thought, are wrong. But the eyes, the
same eyes. And there are more like this; there can be a le¬
gion of her, each with its own name, but all Rachael
Rosen—Rachael, the prototype, used by the manufacturer
to protect the others. He fired at her as, imploringly, she
dashed toward him. The android burst and parts of it flew;
he covered his face and then looked again, looked and saw
the laser tube which it had carried roll away, back onto
the stairs; the metal tube bounced downward, step by
step, the sound echoing and diminishing and slowing. The
hard one of the three, Mercer had said. He peered about,
searching for Mercer. The old man had gone. They can fol¬
low me with Rachael Rosens until 1 die, he thought, or un¬
til the type becomes obsolete, whichever comes first. And
now the other two, he thought. One of them is not in the
apartment, Mercer had said. Mercer protected me, he re¬
alized. Manifested himself and offered aid. She—it—would








222


PHILIP K. DICK


have gotten me, he said to himself, except for the fact that |j

Mercer w^arned me. I can do the rest now, he realized. ■]

I

This was the impossible one; she knew 1 couldn’t do this.

But it’s over. In an instant. I did what I couldn’t do. The
Batys 1 can track hy standard procedure; they wall he hard .
hut they won’t he like this. :

He stood alone in the empty hall; Mercer had left him
because he had done what he came for, Rachael—or
rather Pris Stratton—had been dismembered and that left
nothing now, only himself. But elsewhere in the building,
the Batys waited and knew. Perceived what he had done
here. Probably, at this point, they were afraid. This had
been their response to his presence in the building. Their
attempt. Without Mercer it would have worked. For them,
winter had come.

This has to be done quickly, what I’m after now, he re¬
alized; he hurried down the hall and all at once his detec¬
tion gear registered the presence of cephalic activity. He
had found their apartment. No more need of the gear; he
discarded it and rapped on the apartment door.

From wdthin, a man’s voice sounded. “Who is it?”

“This is Mr. Isidore,” Rick said. “Let me in because I’m
looking after you and t-t-two of you are women.”

“We’re not opening the door,” a woman’s voice came.

“I want to watch Buster Friendly on Pris’s TV set,” Rick
said. “Now that he’s proved Mercer doesn’t exist it’s very
important to watch him. I drive a truck for the Van Ness
Pet Hospital, which is owned by Mr. Hannibal S-S-Sloat.”

He made himself stammer. “S-S-So would you open the
d-d-door? It’s my apartment.” He waited, and the door






DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


223


opened. Within the apartment he saw darkness and indis¬
tinct shapes, two of them.

The smaller shape, the woman, said, “You have to ad¬
minister tests.”

“It’s too late,” Rick said. The taller figure tried to push
the door shut and turn on some variety of electronic
equipment. “No,” Rick said, “I have to come in.” He let Roy
Baty fire once; he held his own fire until the laser beam
had passed by him as he twisted out of the way. “You’ve
lost your legal basis,” Rick said, “by firing on me. You
should have forced me to give you the Voigt-Kampff test.
But now it doesn’t matter.” Once more Roy Baty sent a
laser beam cutting at him, missed, dropped the tube and
ran somewhere deeper inside the apartment, to another
room, perhaps, the electronic hardware abandoned.

“Why didn’t Pris get you?” Mrs. Baty said.

“There is no Pris,” he said. “Only Rachael Rosen, over
and over again.” He saw the laser tube in her dimly out¬
lined hand; Roy Baty had slipped it to her, had meant to
decoy him into the apartment, far in, so that Irmgard Baty
could get him from behind, in the back. “Tm sorry, Mrs.
Baty,” Rick said, and shot her.

Roy Baty, in the other room, let out a cry of anguish.

“Okay, you loved her,” Rick said. “And 1 loved Rachael.
And the special loved the other Rachael.” He shot Roy
Baty; the big man’s corpse lashed about, toppled like an
overstacked collection of separate, brittle entities; it
smashed into the kitchen table and carried dishes and flat-
ware down with it. Reflex circuits in the corpse made it
twitch and flutter, but it had died; Rick ignored it, not see-




224


PHILIP K. DICK


ing it and not seeing that of Irmgard Baty by the front
door. I got the last one, Rick realized. Six today; almost a
record. And now it’s over and 1 can go home, back to Iran
and the goat. And we’ll have enough money, for once.

He sat down on the couch, and presently as he sat there
in the silence of the apartment, among the non-stirring ob¬
jects, the special Mr. Isidore appeared at the door.

“Better not look,” Rick said.

“I saw her on the stairs. Pris.” The special was crying.

“Don’t take it so hard,” Rick said. He got dizzily to his
feet, laboring. “Where’s your phone?”

The special said nothing, did nothing except stand. So
Rick hunted for the phone himself, found it, and dialed
Harry Bryant’s office.





“Good,” Harry Bryant said, after he had been told. “Well,
go get some rest. We’ll send a patrol car to pick up the
three bodies.”

Rick Deckard hung up. “Androids are stupid,” he said
savagely to the special. “Roy Baty couldn’t tell me from you;
it thought you were at the door. The police will clean up in
here; why don’t you stay in another apartment until they’re
finished? You don’t want to be in here with what’s left.”

“I’m leaving this b-b-building,” Isidore said. “I’m go¬
ing to 1-1-live deeper in town where there’s m-m-more
people.”

“I think there’s a vacant apartment in my building,”
Rick said.

Isidore stammered, “I don’t w-w-want to live near you.”

“Go outside or upstairs,” Rick said. “Don’t stay in here.”

The special floundered, not knowing what to do; a vari¬
ety of mute expressions crossed his face and then, turn¬
ing, he shuffled out of the apartment, leaving Rick alone.

What a job to have to do, Rick thought. I’m a scourge.


225






226


PHILIP K. DICK


like famine or plague. Where 1 go the ancient curse fol¬
lows. As Mercer said, 1 am required to do wrong. Every¬
thing I’ve done has been wrong from the start. Anyhow,
now it’s time to go home. Maybe, after I’ve been there
awhile with Iran, I’ll forget.

When he got back to his own apartment building, Iran
met him on the roof. She looked at him in a deranged, pe¬
culiar way; in all his years with her he had never seen her
like this.

Putting his arm around her, he said, “Anyhow it’s over.
And I’ve been thinking; maybe Harry Bryant can assign
me to a—”

“Rick,” she said, “1 have to tell you something. I’m
sorry. The goat is dead.”

For some reason it did not surprise him; it only made
him feel worse, a quantitative addition to the weight
shrinking him from every side. “I think there’s a guaran¬
tee in the contract,” he said. “If it gets sick within ninety
days the dealer—”

“It didn’t get sick. Someone”—Iran cleared her throat
and went on huskily—“someone came here, got the goat
out of its cage, and dragged it to the edge of the roof.”

“And pushed it off?” he said.

“Yes.” She nodded.

“Did you see who did it?”

“I saw her very clearly,” Iran said. “Barbour was still up
here fooling around; he came down to get me and we
called the police, but by then the animal was dead and she
had left. A small young-looking girl with dark hair and
large black eyes, very thin. Wearing a long fish-scale coat.


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


227


r

She had a mail-pouch purse. And she made no effort to
keep us from seeing her. As if she didn’t care.”

“No, she didn’t care,” he said. “Rachael wouldn’t give a
damn if you saw her; she probably wanted you to, so I’d
know who had done it.” He kissed her. “You’ve been wait¬
ing up here all this time?”

“Only for half an hour. That’s when it happened; half an
hour ago.” Iran, gently, kissed him back. “It’s so awful. So
needless.”

He turned toward his parked car, opened the door, and
got in behind the wheel. “Not needless,” he said. “She had
what seemed to her a reason.” An android reason, he
thought.

“Where are you going? Won’t you come downstairs
and—be with me? There was the most shocking news on
TV; Buster Friendly claims that Mercer is a fake. What do
you think about that, Rick? Do you think it could be true?”

“Everything is true,” he said. “Everything anybody has
ever thought.” He snapped on the car motor.

“Will you be all right?”

“I’ll be all right,” he said, and thought. And I’m going to
die. Both those are true, too. He closed the car door,
flicked a signal wdth his hand to Iran, and then swept up
into the night sky.

Once, he thought, 1 would have seen the stars. Years ago.
But now it’s only the dust; no one has seen a star in years, at
least not from Earth. Maybe I’ll go where 1 can see stars, he
said to himself as the car gained velocity and altitude; it
headed away from San Francisco, toward the uninhabited
desolation to the north. To the place where no living thing
would go. Not unless it felt that the end had come.


21


In the early morning light the land below him extended
seemingly forever, gray and refuse-littered. Pebbles the
size of houses had rolled to a stop next to one another, and
he thought. It’s like a shipping room when all the merchan¬
dise has left. Only fragments of crates remain, the contain¬
ers which signify nothing in themselves. Once, he thought,
crops grew here and animals grazed. What a remarkable
thought, that anything could have cropped grass here.

What a strange place, he thought, for all of that to die.

He brought the hovercar dovm, coasted above the surface
for a time. What would Dave Holden say about me now? he
asked himself. In one sense I’m now the greatest bounty
hunter who ever hved; no one ever retired six Nexus-6 types
in one twenty-four-hour span and no one probably ever will
again. I ought to call him, he said to himself.

A cluttered hillside swooped up at him; he lifted the
hovercar as the world came close. Fatigue, he thought; I
shouldn’t be driving still. He clicked off the ignition, glided
for an interval, and then set the hovercar dovm. It tumbled


228






DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


229


and bounced across the hillside, scattering rocks; headed
upward, it came at last to a grinding, skittering stop.

Picking up the receiver of the car’s phone, he dialed the
operator at San Francisco. “Give me Mount Zion Hospital,”
he told her.

Presently he had another operator on the vidscreen.'
“Mount Zion Hospital.”

“You have a patient named Dave Holden,” he said.
“Would it be possible to talk to him? Is he well enough?”

“Just a moment and I’ll check on that, sir.” The screen
temporarily blanked out. Time passed. Rick took a pinch
of Dr. Johnson Snuff and shivered; without the car’s
heater, the temperature had begun to plunge. “Dr. Costa
says that Mr. Holden is not receiving calls,” the operator
told him, reappearing.

“This is police business,” he said; he held his flat pack of
ID up to the screen.

“Just a moment.” Again the operator vanished. Again
Rick inhaled a pinch of Dr. Johnson Snuff; the menthol in
it tasted foul, so early in the morning. He rolled dovm the
car window and tossed the little yellow tin out into the
rubble. “No, sir,” the operator said, once more on his
screen. “Dr. Costa does not feel Mr. Holden’s condition will
permit him to take any calls, no matter how urgent, for at
least—”

“Okay,” Rick said. He hung up.

The air, too, had a foul quality; he rolled up the window
again. Dave is really out, he reflected. I wonder why they
didn’t get me? Because I moved too fast, he decided. All in
one day; they couldn’t have expected it. Harry Bryant was
right.



230


PHILIP K. DICK


The car had hecome too cold now, so he opened the
door and stepped out. A noxious, unexpected wind filtered
through his clothes and he began to walk, ruhhing his
hands together.

It would have been rewarding to talk to Dave, he de¬
cided. Dave would have approved what I did. But also he
would have understood the other part, which I don’t think
even Mercer comprehends. For Mercer everything is easy,
he thought, because Mercer accepts everything. Nothing is
alien to him. But what I’ve done, he thought; that’s be¬
come alien to me. In fact everything about me has become
^ unnatural; Vye become an unnatural self.

He walked on, up the hillside, and with each step the
weight on him grew. Too tired, he thought, to climb. Stop¬
ping, he wiped stinging sweat from his eyes, salt tears pro¬
duced by his skin, his whole aching body. Then, angry at
himself, he spat—spat with wrath and contempt, for him¬
self, with utter hate, onto the barren ground. Thereupon
he resumed his trudge up the slope, the lonely and unfa¬
miliar terrain, remote from everything; nothing lived here
except himself.

The heat. It had become hot now; evidently time had
passed. And he felt hunger. He had not eaten for god knew
how long. The hunger and heat combined, a poisonous
taste resembling defeat; yes, he thought, that’s what it is:
I’ve been defeated in some obscure way. By having killed
the androids? By Rachael’s murder of my goat? He did not
know, but as he plodded along, a vague and almost hallu¬
cinatory pall hazed over his mind; he found himself at one
point, with no notion of how it could be, a step from an al¬
most certainly fatal cliffside fall—falling humiliatingly and








DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


231


helplessly, he thought; on and on, with no one even to wit¬
ness it. Here there existed no one to record his or anyone
else’s degradation, and any courage or pride which might
manifest itself here at the end would go unmarked: the dead
stones, the dust-stricken weeds dry and dying, perceived
nothing, recollected nothing, about him or themselves.

At that moment the first rock—and it was not rubber or
*

soft foam plastic—struck him in the inguinal region. And the
pain, the first knowledge of absolute isolation and suffer¬
ing, touched him throughout in its undisguised actual form.

He halted. And then, goaded on—the goad invisible but
real, not to be challenged—he resumed his climb. Rolling
upward, he thought, like the stones; I am doing what
stones do, without volition. Without it meaning anything.

“Mercer,” he said, panting; he stopped, stood still. In
front of him he distinguished a shadowy figure, motion¬
less. “Wilbur Mercer! Is that you?” My god, he realized;
it’s my shadow. I have to get out of here, down off this hill!

He scrambled back down. Once, he fell; clouds of dust
obscured everything, and he ran from the dust—he hur¬
ried faster, sliding and tumbling on the loose pebbles.
Ahead he saw his parked car. I’m back down, he said to
himself. I’m off the hill. He plucked open the car door,
squeezed inside. Who threw the stone at me? he asked
himself. No one. But why does it bother me? I’ve under¬
gone it before, during fusion. While using my empathy
box, like everyone else. This isn’t new. But it was. Be¬
cause, he thought, I did it alone.

Trembling, he got a fresh new tin of snuff from the glove
compartment of the car; pulling off the protective band of
tape, he took a massive pinch, rested, sitting half in the car





232


PHILIP K. DICK


and half out, his feet on the arid, dusty soil. This was the
last place to go to, he realized. I shouldn’t have flown here.
And now he found himself too tired to fly back out.

If I could just talk to Dave, he thought. I’d be all right; I
could get away from here, go home and go to bed. I still
have my electric sheep and I still have my job. There’ll be
more andys to retire; my career isn’t over; I haven’t re¬
tired the last andy in existence. Maybe that’s what it is, he
thought. I’m afraid there aren’t any more.

He looked at his watch. Nine-thirty.

Picking up the vidphone receiver, he dialed the Hall of
Justice on Lombard. “Let me speak to Inspector Bryant,”
he said to the police switchboard operator Miss Wild.

“Inspector Bryant is not in his office, Mr. Deckard; he’s
out in his car, but I don’t get any answer. He must have
temporarily left his car.”

“Did he say where he intended to go?”

“Something about the androids you retired last night.”

“Let me talk to my secretary,” he said.

A moment later the orange, triangular face of Ann
Marsten appeared on the screen. “Oh, Mr. Deckard—In¬
spector Bryant has been trying to get hold of you. I think
he’s turning your name over to Chief Cutter for a citation.
Because you retired those six—”

“I know what I did,” he said.

“That’s never happened before. Oh, and Mr. Deckard;
your wife phoned. She wants to know if you’re all right.
Are you all right?”

He said nothing.

“Anyhow,” Miss Marsten said, “maybe you should call


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


233


her and tell her. She left word she’ll be home, waiting to
hear from you.”

“Did you hear about my goat?” he said.

!

“No, 1 didn’t even know you had a goat.”

Rick said, “They took my goat.”

“Who did, Mr. Deckard? Animal thieves? We just got a
report on a huge new gang of them, probably teenagers,
operating in—”

“Life thieves,” he said.

“1 don’t understand you, Mr. Deckard.” Miss Marsten
peered at him intently. “Mr. Deckard, you look awful. So
tired. And god, your cheek is bleeding.”

Putting his hand up, he felt the blood. From a rock,
probably. More than one, evidently, had struck him.

“You look,” Miss Marsten said, “like Wilbur Mercer.”

“1 am,” he said. “I’m Wilbur Mercer; I’ve permanently
fused with him. And I can’t unfuse. I’m sitting here waiting

I to unfuse. Somewhere near the Oregon border.”

[ “Shall we send someone out? A department car to pick
you up?”

“No,” he said. “I’m no longer with the department.”

“Obviously you did too much yesterday, Mr. Deckard,”
she said chidingly. “What you need now is bed rest. Mr.
Deckard, you’re our best bounty hunter, the best we’ve
ever had. I’ll tell Inspector Bryant when he comes in; you
go on home and go to bed. Call your wife right away, Mr.
Deckard, because she’s terribly, terribly worried. I could
tell. You’re both in dreadful shape.”

“It’s because of my goat,” he said. “Not the androids;
Rachael was wrong—I didn’t have any trouble retiring





234


PHILIP K. DICK


them. And the special was wrong, too, about my not being
able to fuse with Mercer again. The only one who was
right is Mercer.”

“You better get back here to the Bay Area, Mr. Deckard.
Where there’re people. There isn’t anything living up
there near Oregon; isn’t that right? Aren’t you alone?”

“It’s strange,” Rick said. “1 had the absolute, utter, com¬
pletely real illusion that 1 had become Mercer and people
were lobbing rocks at me. But not the way you experience
it when you hold the handles of an empathy box. When
you use an empathy box you feel you’re with Mercer. The
difference is 1 wasn’t with anyone; 1 was alone.”

“They’re saying now that Mercer is a fake.”

“Mercer isn’t a fake,” he said. “Unless reality is a fake.”
This hill, he thought. This dust and these many stones,
each one different from all the others. “I’m afraid,” he
said, “that 1 can’t stop being Mercer. Once you start it’s too
late to back off.” Will 1 have to climb the hill again? he
wondered. Forever, as Mercer does . . . trapped by eter¬
nity. “Good-bye,” he said, and started to ring off.

“You’ll call your wdfe? You promise?”

“Yes.” He nodded. “Thanks, Ann.” He hung up. Bed rest,
he thought. The last time I hit bed was with Rachael. A vio¬
lation of a statute. Copulation with an android; absolutely
against the law, here and on the colony worlds as well. She
must be back in Seattle now. With the other Rosens, real
and humanoid. 1 wish 1 could do to you what you did to me,
he wished. But it can’t be done to an android because they
don’t care. If 1 had killed you last night, my goat would be
alive now. There’s where 1 made the wrong decision. Yes,
he thought; it can all be traced back to that and to my go-


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


235


ing to bed with you. Anyhow, you were correct about one
thing; it did change me. But not in the way you predicted.

A much worse way, he decided.

And yet I don’t really care. Not any longer. Not, he
thought, after what happened to me up there, toward the
top of the hill. 1 wonder what would have come next, if 1
had gone on climbing and reached the top. Because that’s
where Mercer appears to die. That’s where Mercer’s tri¬
umph manifests itself, there at the end of the great side¬
real cycle.

But if I’m Mercer, he thought, 1 can never die, not in ten
thousand years. Mercer is immortal

Once more he picked up the phone receiver, to call
his wife.

And froze.





22


He set the receiver back down and did not take his eyes
from the spot that had moved outside the car. The bulge in
the ground, among the stones. An animal, he said to him¬
self. And his heart lugged under the excessive load, the
shock of recognition. 1 know what it is, he realized; I’ve
never seen one before but I know it from the old nature
films they show on Government TV.

They’re extinct! he said to himself; swiftly he dragged
out his much-creased Sidney's, turned the pages with
twitching fingers.

TOAD (Bufonidae), all varieties. E.

Extinct for years now. The critter most precious to Wil¬
bur Mercer, along with the donkey. But toads most of all.

I need a box. He squirmed around, saw nothing in the
back seat of the hovercar; he leaped out, hurried to the
trunk compartment, unlocked and opened it. There rested
a cardboard container, inside it a spare fuel pump for his


236



DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


237


car. He dumped the fuel pump out, found some furry
hempish twine, and walked slowly toward the toad. Not
taking his eyes from it.

The toad, he saw, blended in totally with the texture
I and shade of the ever-present dust. It had, perhaps,

I evolved, meeting the new climate as it had met all climates
before. Had it not moved, he would never have spotted it;
yet he had been sitting no more than two yards from it.

I What happens when you find—if you find—an animal be¬
lieved extinct? he asked himself, trying to remember. It
happened so seldom. Something about a star of honor
' from the U.N. and a stipend. A reward running into mil¬
lions of dollars. And of all possibilities—to find the critter
most sacred to Mercer. Jesus, he thought; it can’t be.
Maybe it’s due to brain damage on my part: exposure to
i radioactivity. I’m a special, he thought. Something has
happened to me. Like the chickenhead Isidore and his spi-

1

der; what happened to him is happening to me. Did Mer¬
cer arrange it? But I’m Mercer. I arranged it; I found the
toad. Found it because I see through Mercer’s eyes.

He squatted on his haunches, close beside the toad. It
had shoved aside the grit to make a partial hole for itself,
displaced the dust with its rump. So that only the top of its
flat skull and its eyes projected above ground. Meanwhile,
its metabolism slowed almost to a halt, it had drifted off
into a trance. The eyes held no spark, no awareness of
him, and in horror he thought. It’s dead, of thirst maybe.
But it had moved.

Setting the cardboard box down, he carefully began
brushing the loose soil away from the toad. It did not seem
to object, but of course it was not aware of his existence.








238


PHILIP K. DICK


When he lifted the toad out, he felt its peculiar coolness;
in his hands its body seemed dry and wrinkled—almost
flahhy—and as cold as if it had taken up residence in a
grotto miles under the earth away from the sun. Now the
toad squirmed; with its weak hind feet it tried to pry itself
from his grip, wanting, instinctively, to go flopping off. A
hig one, he thought; full-grown and wise. Capable, in its
own fashion, of surviving even that which we’re not really
managing to survive. 1 wonder where it finds the water for
its eggs.

So this is what Mercer sees, he thought as he pains¬
takingly tied the cardboard box shut—tied it again and
again. Life which we can no longer distinguish; life care¬
fully buried up to its forehead in the carcass of a dead
world. In every cinder of the universe Mercer probably
perceives inconspicuous life. Now I know, he thought.
And once having seen through Mercer’s eyes, I probably
will never stop.

And no android, he thought, will cut the legs from this.
As they did from the chickenhead’s spider.

He placed the carefully tied box on the car seat and got
in behind the wheel. It’s like being a kid again, he thought.
Now all the weight had left him, the monumental and op¬
pressive fatigue. Wait until Iran hears about this; he
snatched the vidphone receiver, started to dial. Then
paused. I’ll keep it as a surprise, he concluded. It’ll only
take thirty or forty minutes to fly back there.

Eagerly he switched the motor on, and, shortly, had
zipped up into the sky, in the direction of San Francisco,
seven hundred miles to the south.










DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


239


At the Penfield mood organ, Iran Deckard sat with her
right index finger touching the numbered dial. But she did
not dial; she felt too listless and ill to want anything: a bur¬
den which closed off the future and any possibilities which
it might once have contained. If Rick were here, she
thought, he’d get me to dial 3 and that way I’d find myself
wanting to dial something important, ebullient joy or if not
that then possibly an 888, the desire to watch TV no matter
what’s on it. I wonder what is on it, she thought. And then
she wondered again where Rick had gone. He may be com¬
ing back, and on the other hand he may not be, she said to
herself, and felt her bones within her shrink with age.

A knock sounded at the apartment door.

Putting down the Penfield manual, she jumped up,
thinking, I don’t need to dial now; I already have it—if it is
Rick. She ran to the door, opened the door wide.

“Hi,” he said. There he stood, a cut on his cheek, his
clothes wrinkled and gray, even his hair saturated with
dust. His hands, his face—dust clung to every part of him,
except his eyes. Round with awe his eyes shone, like those
of a little boy; he looks, she thought, as if he has been play¬
ing and now it’s time to give up and come home. To rest
and wash and tell about the miracles of the day.

“It’s nice to see you,” she said.

“I have something.” He held a cardboard box with both
hands; when he entered the apartment he did not set it
down. As if, she thought, it contained something too fragile
and too valuable to let go of; he wanted to keep it perpetu¬
ally in his hands.

She said, “I’ll fix you. a cup of coffee.” At the stove she
pressed the coffee button, and in a moment had put the








240


PHILIP K. DICK


imposing mug by his place at the kitchen table. Still hold¬
ing the box, he seated himself, and on his face the round¬
eyed wonder remained. In all the years she had known
him she had not encountered this expression before.
Something had happened since she had seen him last;
since, last night, he had gone off in his car. Now he had
come back and this box had arrived with him: he held, in
the box, everything that had happened to him.

“I’m going to sleep,” he announced. “All day. 1 phoned
in and got Harry Bryant; he said take the day off and rest.
Which is exactly what I’m going to do.” Carefully he set the
box down on the table and picked up his coffee mug; duti¬
fully, because she wanted him to, he drank his coffee.

Seating herself across from him she said, “What do you
have in the box, Rick?”

“A toad.”

“Can 1 see it?” She watched as he untied the box and re¬
moved the lid. “Oh,” she said, seeing the toad; for some
reason it frightened her. “Will it bite?” she asked.

“Pick it up. It won’t bite; toads don’t have teeth.” Rick
lifted the toad out and extended it toward her. Stemming
her aversion, she accepted it. “1 thought toads were ex¬
tinct,” she said as she turned it over, curious about its
legs; they seemed almost useless. “Can toads jump like
frogs? 1 mean, will it jump out of my hands suddenly?”

“The legs of toads are weak,” Rick said. “That’s the
main difference between a toad and a frog, that and wa¬
ter. A frog remains near water but a toad can live in the
desert. 1 found this in the desert, up near the Oregon bor¬
der. Where everything had died.” He reached to take it


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


241


back from her. But she had discovered something; still
holding it upside down, she poked at its abdomen and
then, with her nail, located the tiny control panel. She
flipped the panel open.

“Oh.” His face fell by degrees. “Yeah, so 1 see; you’re
right.” Crestfallen, he gazed mutely at the false animal; he
took it back from her, fiddled with the legs as if baffled—
he did not seem quite to understand. He then carefully re¬
placed it in its box. “I wonder how it got out there in the
desolate part of California like that. Somebody must have
put it there. No way to tell what for.”

“Maybe 1 shouldn’t have told you—about it being elec¬
trical.” She put her hand out, touched his arm; she felt

!

guilty, seeing the effect it had on him, the change.

“No,” Rick said. “I’m glad to know. Or rather—” He be¬
came silent. “I’d prefer to know.”

“Do you want to use the mood organ? To feel better?
You always have gotten a lot out of it, more than 1 ever
have.”

“I’ll be okay.” He shook his head, as if trying to clear it,

I

i still bewildered. “The spider Mercer gave the chicken-
head, Isidore; it probably was artificial, too. But it doesn’t
matter. The electric things have their lives, too. Paltry as
those lives are.”

Iran said, “You look as if you’ve walked a hundred
miles.”

“It’s been a long day.” He nodded.

“Go get into bed and sleep.”

He stared at her then, as if perplexed. “It is over, isn’t
it?” Trustingly, he seemed to be waiting for her to tell him.




242


PHILIP K. DICK


as if she would know. As if hearing himself say it meant
nothing; he had a dubious attitude toward his own words;
they didn’t become real, not until she agreed.

“It’s over,” she said.

“God, what a marathon assignment,” Rick said. “Once I
began on it there wasn’t any way for me to stop; it kept
carrying me along, until finally I got to the Batys, and then
suddenly I didn’t have anything to do. And that—” He hes¬
itated, evidently amazed at what he had begun to say.
“That part was worse,” he said. “After I finished. I couldn’t
stop because there would be nothing left after I stopped.
You were right this morning when you said I’m nothing
but a crude cop with crude cop hands.”

“I don’t feel that anymore,” she said. “I’m just damn
glad to have you come back home where you ought to be.”
She kissed him and that seemed to please him; his face lit
up, almost as much as before—before she had shown him
that the toad was electric.

“Do you think I did wrong?” he asked. “What I did
today?”

“No.”

“Mercer said it was wrong but I should do it anyhow.
Really weird. Sometimes it’s better to do something wrong
than right.”

“It’s the curse on us,” Iran said. “That Mercer talks
about.”

“The dust?” he asked. ^

“The killers that found Mercer in his sixteenth year,
when they told him he couldn’t reverse time and bring
things back to life again. So now all he can do is move
along with life, going where it goes, to death. And the


DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?


243


killers throw the rocks; it’s they who’re doing it. Still pur¬
suing him. And all of us, actually. Did one of them cut your
cheek, where it’s been bleeding?”

“Yes,” he said wanly.

“Will you go to bed now? If I set the mood organ to a
670 setting?”

“What does that bring about?” he asked.

“Long deserved peace,” Iran said.

He got to his feet, stood painfully, his face drowsy and
confused, as if a legion of battles had ebbed and advanced
there, over many years. And then, by degrees, he pro¬
gressed along the route to the bedroom. “Okay,” he said.
“Long deserved peace.” He stretched out on the bed, dust
sifting from his clothes and hair onto the white sheets.

No need to turn on the mood organ, Iran realized as she
pressed the button which made the windows of the bed¬
room opaque. The gray light of day disappeared.

On the bed Rick, after a moment, slept.

She stayed there for a time, keeping him in sight to be
sure he wouldn’t wake up, wouldn’t spring to a sitting po¬
sition in fear as he sometimes did at night. And then, pres¬
ently, she returned to the kitchen, reseated herself at the
kitchen table.

Next to her the electric toad flopped and rustled in its
box; she wondered what it “ate,” and what repairs on it
would run. Artificial flies, she decided.

Opening the phone book, she looked in the yellow pages
under animal accessories, electric, she dialed and when
the saleswoman answered, said, “I’d like to order one
pound of artificial flies that really fly around and buzz,
please.”


244


PHILIP K. DICK


“Is it for an electric turtle, ma’am?”

“A toad,” she said.

“Then I suggest our mixed assortment of artificial
crawling and flying bugs of all types including—”

“The flies will do,” Iran said. “Will you deliver? I don’t
want to leave my apartment; my husband’s asleep and I
want to be sure he’s all right.”

The clerk said, “For a toad I’d suggest also a perpetu¬
ally renewing puddle, unless it’s a horned toad, in which
case there’s a kit containing sand, multicolored pebbles,
and bits of organic debris. And if you’re going to be putting
it through its feed cycle regularly, I suggest you let our
service department make a periodic tongue adjustment. In
a toad that’s vital.”

“Fine,” Iran said. “I want it to work perfectly. My hus¬
band is devoted to it.” She gave her address and hung up.

And, feeling better, fixed herself at last a cup of black,
hot coffee. 
